The last few episodes of the show have
been about attention, but about
attention in terms of something else.
Attention in terms of Zoran Mandani and
Donald Trump. Attention in terms of the
big beautiful bill.
But I wanted to do an episode that was
about attention in terms of itself. If
we're going to say attention is
currency, if we're going to say it's
power, well, what kind of currency is
it? What kind of power is it? I'm a
pretty loyal reader of Kyla's newsletter
by Kyla Scanland, which often feels to
me like it's being like sent back in
time from some future economy. And in a
way, it is. Kyla is very much a member
of Gen Z.
Bartcoin has been one of the most stable
assets of this entire time, which I
think says a lot about this entire time.
and the economy she is reporting on, the
economy she is theorizing, an economy
where attention drives capital as
opposed to capital driving attention.
Kyle is also the author of the book in
this economy and you might have heard
some of her different coinages like vibe
session. She's a fascinating person to
talk about this with as always my email
as Kleinshow at NY times.com.
[Music]
Kyle Scanland, welcome to the show.
Thanks for having me. What is different
about the economy that that you live in
that you see that you feel Gen Z is
experiencing from the way us like 40 and
50 year olds described or understood the
economy?
So one of my pieces that went far was a
Gen Z and the end of predictable
progress and it was based on my research
over the past year. I've been traveling
like on a quasi book tour, you know,
going to a lot of college campuses and
going to a lot of conferences and I've
been talking to young people about how
they experience the economy and how they
think about their future. And so for
them, it doesn't feel like there's that
quote unquote path of predictable
progress that like maybe their parents
had or their grandparents had. And of
course, every generation has had its own
challenges, but for Gen Z, you don't
have that predictable return on a
college education anymore because of
things like AI, because of how expensive
college has gotten. you don't
necessarily have a path toward buying a
house that feels even remotely
approachable. And you know, if you think
about retirement or just moving through
a career path, that also feels really
far away. And so that whole piece was
like, well, what does it look like if
this path that everybody has followed
has kind of disappeared more or less?
Let me stay on the the topic of the feel
of it. So then what does it feel like if
you can't see your way to a house? If
you're not sure what the career paths
are, if you're not sure what AI will do,
like if you had to describe the
emotional structure of the conversations
you have with people on the tour, what
are the dominant emotions?
I think there's a lot of worry. I mean,
I think everybody picks up on this. Like
there are so many think pieces about
like the kids are not all right, right?
Like there's a lot of nihilism, there's
a lot of concern, there's a lot of fear,
there's a lot of anxiety. And you sense
that when you talk to people cuz like
they don't really know what to do
because this path that has sort of been
instilled in you from the time that you
were little like go to college,
graduate, buy a house, it's just it's
out of reach. And so when you can't get
that, it feels far away, right? And so
David Brooks was writing about the
rejection generation that I think
encapsulated it really well cuz he was
like the ginzers are facing like
rejection after rejection. like it's
hard to get into college and then when
you graduate college it's hard to get a
job. And so I think that element of
always being rejected from everything or
at least feeling like you're being
rejected from everything creates those
elements of nihilism that show up in how
Jenzers might spend or save or invest.
Tell me about your barbell theory of Gen
Z.
Essentially there's like two ways that
people seem to be responding to the
uncertainty in the economy and the lack
of a path of predictable progress. One
path is tool belt pragmatism. So people
going back to the trades like becoming a
plumber, electrician, great. Um, taking
a path that isn't as speculative and
uncertain as, you know, getting a bunch
of debt and and going to college. Other
people are going a memecoin, gambling,
sports betting type of route. And so you
have these two ends of the extreme of
risk, but both of those are responses to
that path of get a college education,
get a white collar job, and go off into
the sunset, not really working anymore.
How much is this a narrative and how
much is it a reality? So if you look at
unemployment for Gen Z or new college
graduates recently the unemployment for
new new college graduates is up a bit
but it's not you know 30% or 40%. I've
seen people debating the housing
question. You know, we're millennials
are now genzers. Are they really so far
behind other generations on housing? And
won't all those houses get passed on
anyways? Is this really a problem? So,
when you is there a divergence in your
view between the data on the economy
that people in Gen Z are in and how they
feel about it or does it match?
I still think there are some elements of
a disconnect, right? like people might
be feeling a certain way because of
social media that doesn't always match
the data. But I think when we look at
some data points like the college wage
premium, so basically how much more you
make with a college degree than not. And
that's eroded over the past couple of
years. And so you're graduating with a
college degree, very expensive. You're
not making as much as you might expect.
Housing is still quite expensive. like
eventually those homes will pass on, but
I think the median age to buy a house
now is like 54 years old and in the
1980s I believe it was 34. And so there
are some data points that support the
fact that there are these elements of
nihilism and perhaps reasons for feeling
nihilistic that weave into how Jenzie
experiences the economy. But I think
it's all exacerbated by things like
social media for sure. Like there is
elements of narrative that might sweep
beyond the data, but the data tells the
story too.
You also talk about how there's not just
one Gen Z.
There are multiple.
Yeah.
What are they?
Yes. So I'm an ancient Gen Z.
I'm an elder millennial.
Um so I graduated right into the
pandemic and so I'm part of the Gen Z
ones. So those that were, you know, you
you remember a time in college where you
weren't in Zoom like you were pre-
pandemic, you were in the workforce
during the pandemic. And then Jenzy one
and a half would be where like my little
brother is. And so he was in college
during the pandemic. And so that shaped
both his relationship with institutions
and his relationship with digital. And
so he got a lot of education via Zoom.
And he relied on digital tools as we all
did during that time to forge
friendships and to forge connections.
And then Jenzie 2.0 is the people that
are in college now and high school now.
And they're the first part of that
generation that is entirely digital. So
for them like that digital seems to be
an extension of reality. So Rachel John
Fos was the first person that kind of
came up with bucketing the Jenz's. She
had Jinzy 1.0 and Jinzy 2.0 and I stuck
a Jinzy one and a half in the middle
because I think it deserves a bit more
splicing. Um, but that's how you can
think of it is like the relationship
with technology and the relationships to
institutions
and the pandemic is such a big player in
that, right? To to be to graduate before
the pandemic, to be in school during the
pandemic. Is the implicit argument here
that Gen Z is just going to be a very
different generation because it had this
shock that other generations didn't,
right? That the pandemic hit at a much
more formative time for eventually all
Genzers and what came before them,
what's going to come after them is going
to be less volatile
than um than what they went through.
Yeah, I think so. I think Jinzy is the
beta generation, the beta tester
generation rather. Um, so they're the
ones who were like, "Is Tik Tok good for
the brain? We'll see." And, you know,
can students do Zoom classes and still
get an education? We'll see. Is
unfettered access to the internet. Okay,
we'll see. Like, we've tested a lot of
things in schools,
right? And and we're learning. We're
learning like a lot of schools are
starting to ban smartphones. But I yes,
I think Jinzy is the generation that
hopefully will take a lot of lessons for
Gen Alpha and perhaps not put them
through what the Genzers have gone
through from a digital mental
perspective.
How does AI fit into the job market that
young people are both seeing and
sensing?
So AI is interesting because there's all
these stories about how AI is going to
replace entry-level jobs and these
companies are going to automate all this
work with AI. Like Salesforce, I think
has automated so they say like 30 to 50%
of their works or something like that.
And so if you're a young person and
you're looking at that, you're like, "Oh
no, like these entry-level jobs that I
rely on to, you know, get on the bottom
rung of my career ladder are going to be
taken away from me." And so I think that
also creates an element of of fear. It's
like, well, where do you even enter the
workforce if the entry- level jobs are
supposedly all going to be done by AI?
This is where I think the the feeling of
it is important. When I both feel this a
bit myself, but when I talk to people
who are starting out more in their
careers,
my sense
of the moment is it it's a little bit
for a lot of people like looking at a
wave in the distance and you turn on the
news and they keep telling you you have
a tsunami warning and you're like, well,
is that wave going to turn into a
tsunami and if so, how quickly? and do I
have time to get out or am I in a high
enough you know area and you don't
really know but that it has become this
fog between you and a stable vision of
your own future right when I started out
in journalism it wasn't clear that I
could succeed in journalism but it was
never because there might be a massive
technological shock to journalism in
which a computer would do my job instead
of me
right
and obviously things like that have
happened in manufacturing ing with both
um you know globalization and automation
but I think it's some of that this that
there is just this ambient uncertainty
it it feels like that that moment of
like liquidness
um or I think fog is probably the better
metaphor is very present for people.
Yeah. Yeah. And if you look at the money
that the companies are spending like
that can, you know, that's concerning
too. When you see like Mark Zuckerberg
spending billions of dollars to uh poach
people from open AI, it's like well
clearly something is happening here.
Clearly he has some sort of plan. Like
will that plan work? Who knows? Cuz the
metaverse didn't work out, right? And so
I think the overwhelming narrative is
that like oh gosh well if you majored in
computer science like you're out of
luck, man. Good luck out there. or if
you majored in arts or if you're trying
to be an artist, like too bad AI is
going to do your job. And so I think
right now we're at this phase of
technology where we're trying to
establish the human part of it. And
we're not doing a good job at figuring
out where humans need to be in the
technology equation. And instead, we're
like, no, we're just going to automate
everything. And sorry, we don't have a
plan for people.
This really frightens me actually. is
that if AI was going to hit like COVID
hit and just put 50% of the population
out of work, we would do something about
it. But if it moves slowly
and just eats a category and a trunch of
jobs at a time, we're going to blame the
people who don't have jobs,
right? We're going to say, "Well, most
people who graduate with a marketing
degree got a job. So, you're just not
working hard enough. You're not smart
enough. You're not one of the good
ones." Right? We're so used to doing
that in this economy, blaming every
individual for what happens often when
it's, you know, very sectoral, very
technological.
And I talked to a lot of politicians
about this and they're kind of
abstractly worried about it and none of
them have an inkling of a policy answer
for it. Like what do we do if AI, which
seems totally plausible, just doubles
like 18 to 24 year old unemployment in
the next 6 years or triples it? Like
what policy would we deploy for that?
And nothing.
Yeah,
I I'm not surprised to hear that.
I don't know if anybody has a good
answer. Like the common answer you'll
hear is UBI, like universal basic
income, right? like we'll just set aside
$1,000 a month for everybody and and
that'll be that. And I don't think
that's the right answer either cuz like
you know to be human is to work and to
have meaning and and to have purpose.
And so if we all of a sudden just say
like no you don't have meaning and you
don't have purpose like that feels
really bad. And so I I worry, you know,
if we even if we do have a policy
response, like the upheaval, the
societal upheaval that could happen if
all of a sudden we're like no jobs for
everybody could be really bad. And then
there's other side of the coin where
there's a good paper that was published
uh in the National Bureau of Economic
Research that talks about nails like
hammer and nails were once I think zero
and a so 0.5% of GDP like in the 1800s
like the nail part.
Huh.
And so
it's a lot of GDP actually.
Yeah. Right. But like that that just
shows like technology is always shifting
and changing and like no longer nails
like that big of our economy. Like we
develop new parts of our economy just
like we did with the internet. And so
that's kind of what we have to hope for
is that new jobs will be established
with AI rather than no jobs at all
which maybe they will but it's that that
disruption period that that is very
scary. I think you mentioned UBI um been
around a lot of eBay discourse. My wife
wrote a book on on giving people money
uh a couple years back. My old colleague
Dylan Matthews I thought had a great
line on this which he said that UBI is
simultaneously too much and too little
of a solution for the AI problem because
if you imagine you're a unionized truck
driver right an interstate truck driver
you're making $88,000 a year and you
your job is automated by a driverless
truck which we are currently pretty
close to being able to do in fact maybe
already can do it and then what in a a
UBI in a far-fetched scenario where we
actually pass one is going to give you
$22,000 a year and also going to give me
$22,000 a year. So, it's not enough of a
solution for you. It didn't replace your
income or give you your dignity back.
And it's too much solution for me. Like,
I didn't lose my job.
Yeah. And the UBI thing always just
struck me as a very strange like infanc.
It might be good for other reasons,
but AI is not going to put everybody out
of work all at once. AI is going to
make workers more productive, which will
slow down the hiring of new workers. And
that's just a very it's actually just a
much harder problem
Mhm.
to to to solve or to address.
How do you think we should address it? I
have no idea.
So, even like in talking to the the
policy makers, there hasn't been
anything floated that like is this just
something that we're all just going to
stare at each other until it's here? I
think that going to some of your work on
attention, you're going to need a
focusing event
and we don't know what it will be yet
where something happens that clicks into
place that this is a problem we need to
deal with now that people are really
losing their jobs now
and it's going to depend on how big that
event and that trend are. So, a lot of
people lost their jobs to um the
movement of uh factories to China. We
didn't really do that much for them.
No.
Um we just failed to respond to that and
it was very destabilizing over time in
our politics.
I was talking to somebody who's in this
world and we're and he was a big skeptic
that AI was going to take away jobs even
though he was a big believer in AI and
his argument to me was like look you're
going to have so much capital investment
in data centers and all this we're going
to need so many electricians we're going
to meet and it struck me as very
fanciful in this idea that we're going
to turn all of these comm's majors into
electricians really quickly so to me I
just haven't heard
a solution that really makes sense. And
my worry
uh it's weird to be hoping for much more
disruption rather than less. But I think
we would have a much better chance of
responding to it well if the disruption
is significant enough to be undeniable
than if it is slow and a lot of little
pieces happening kind of all at once,
but nobody can quite prove what it's
coming from. Right? Like my my
confidence is higher in an almost
emergency scenario of this than it is in
the accretion that I think we're likely
to get.
Yeah. So you'd rather have a flood than
a slow drip?
I think so.
Yeah.
What do you think would work?
I I I don't know either. That's like the
hard part about it's so easy to diagnose
problems and it's much harder to come up
with solutions it turns out. But I don't
know. I mean I think the physical world
element of AI is also interesting too.
like it does require a significant
amount of resources. Like the data
centers are massive and they're quite
loud if if you're near them. Um I think
we are speedr runninging it. Like I I
wouldn't be surprised if we see a flood
rather than a slow drip just based on
the amount of money that's going into
it. My my version of what I think is
going to happen or one let's call it
plausible scenario for what will happen
is that it's going to be during the next
economic downturn
when companies need to squeeze their
labor forces that they're going to make
a big transition to AI. And so if you
imagine the mixture intentionally of a
recession which is focuses a lot of
coverage and uh and and interest on the
economy
and watching companies do what they've
done in past recessions which is using
the recession as a moment to make a
technological jump into some higher
productivity technology like AI. That I
think is going to be the kind of
scenario where this becomes a really
dominant conversation.
And by the way, you can imagine another
category of answer to it, right? Which
is regulations about how you can and
cannot use AI to replace people um and
various kinds of protectionism, right?
There was a a somewhat famous interview
from a couple years back between Tucker
Carlson and Ben Shapiro
where Carlson is ba basically says
trucking is one of the most common uh
jobs for for men in most states. Oh, I
would absolutely outlaw driverless
trucks. And Shar's like you would and
Carlson's like yeah like what's wrong
with you that you wouldn't? I think
debates like that, should we actually
welcome this productivity increase or
should we stop it will become much more
salient and in a way that people are not
yet ready for because they're so used to
technology just being adopted as opposed
to debated.
Yeah. Not all progress is progress.
Mhm.
Right. Yeah. Some Yeah. I mean, I think
that's the the rub of it. It's like
because what's also interesting about AI
is like yes, it's being used to replace
some jobs, but it's also being used in
ways that are spreading misinformation
and kind of capturing people. Like
people have sent 3 million messages to
the AI chicken on Instagram, right? And
so you also have to question like not
just a hell of a sentence that I don't
really understand to be honest. But it I
mean I can intu
Yeah,
I guess there's a chicken that is
AI generated on Instagram
message it and it says like
what
I don't actually know quite how it
messages back but there have been
million messages exchanged with the
chicken and there's all sorts of like
AOS slot videos on on Tik Tok and um
that's that's a big part of it too like
you know being a person you find meaning
within work, but you also find meaning
within how you spend your leisure time
and increasingly people spend it um
scrolling understandably, right? Like I
was on a plane ride yesterday for like 5
and 1 half hours and the woman next to
me was very nice, but she was scrolling
on TikTok for the entire 5 and 1/2 hours
and you can just only imagine how AI
will accelerate the addictiveness of
stuff like that as well as you know the
impact it'll have to the labor force.
You talk about how AI is going to create
this abundance of intelligence uh that
will create a scarcity of truth. Tell me
about that.
So yeah, I think truth is really
valuable. It's the most important
commodity of the the present moment and
it's something that is increasingly
scarce and once you lose it, it's very
difficult to regain it. And so I think
AI is going to create a lot of
information and a lot of noise and it'll
be increasingly important for people to
be able to sort the truth out from that
because like the AI does hallucinate
quite a bit. If you've ever, you know,
talked to chatbt, it does make stuff up
and you can be like, "Hey, you made that
up and it'll correct itself, but you
still have to be able to source it like
what the truth is and what that means."
And like I think that's also the problem
with social media too is like those
algorithms are designed and the
incentives are perhaps not aligned to
the user. They're aligned toward the
corporation, right? And and so anything
that people can get addicted to and
there's a monetary incentive for them to
get addicted to it, it's going to
happen. And so I think there is a world
where the AI can be a source of truth,
but right now I I don't think it is. But
people take everything it says at face
value. Like the number of at Grock, is
this true? That happens on Twitter where
people are like asking the AI to
validate a tweet rather than go and and
do the research themselves and like work
that muscle in their brain. It's
concerning because you do have to have a
radar for truth because it's so easy to
get taken advantage of right now. um
there's just so much information,
there's so much noise and it's just
non-stop and it's very easy to make
mistakes and a lot of people do and you
have to be able to know what's true and
what isn't and have your own like moral
and value compass. So I guess maybe here
would be an optimistic version of this
which is I think a very standard story
about social media is it shattered the
thing we now call consensus reality and
like how much we ever had consensus
reality I think you can debate but
probably more and at some other points
in history than at this point in history
and that what is AI but an articulator
of consensus reality right what is AI ex
but when you say hey is it true it gives
you this
sort of middle common denominator
vision of truth which is going to miss
perspectives that are maybe valuable at
the margins right I think there's a a
worry that AI will make us all more like
media like AI is a a a technology of
intellectual mediocrity right it it sort
of coheres everybody on the same set of
consensus ideas but we've been sitting
here for so long lamenting the
destruction of that consensus reality.
Maybe this world where everybody's
asking Chad GBT or Grock, is this true?
Is exactly the thing we've been yearning
for.
Maybe I think
I think it has to get there.
Can't blame me for trying.
Yeah. I mean I I think there's a lot of
value in in the optimism, but I think
what you were maybe talking about is
sort of like dead internet theory almost
like where there is this intellectual
flattening of the public and then maybe
people don't come up with new ideas and
they don't challenge themselves and they
don't like there's you know a bunch of
articles talking about how the college
students are having a tough time because
AI is making things a bit too easy. it's
a little too frictionless. And I think I
worry about that too, like the cognitive
effect it could have. Like I noticed it
in myself, like if I overuse AI in terms
of research, which I do use it. I do use
it. Um I I I notice uh the lack of uh
sharpening of my own toolkit.
You you've written a lot about this
world in which it seems to you the like
the social incentive for thinking is
being diminished.
Well, I I mean I have to be cautious of
broad generalizations. So like most of
my I make videos about the economy,
right? So like every
newsletters
and newsletters and wrote a book and um
but
you're multiplatform
but like I I spend a lot of time on
social media and the reason I make
videos on social media is so I can
understand the mechanisms. So every day
I like post a video on on you know
Instagram or or Tik Tok and that way I
can see how people respond and I can
like sort of get a radar for like how
social media is interpreting one side of
a conversation. And so then in terms of
the social incentive for thinking I mean
I do worry that social media has created
elements of polarization that's been
very widely discussed by a lot of
people. Um, and I think AI could um,
exacerbate that and make it more
challenging for people to to go out and
seek information. Like there's a lot of
value in um, memorizing things so that
way you can like pull forward that fact
rather than going and and googling. But,
you know, these arguments are also old,
right? Like people did say the same
stuff about Googling. It's like making
people dumb. And so perhaps it's just
that same argument rehashed. So I think
AI is also a bridge to this other
argument you're making which is that
attention
is infrastructure.
Yeah.
And one of the things you write in that
is that traditional economic substrates
are land, labor, capital, bedrock inputs
to make stuff, but now the foundational
input is attention. Walk me through
that.
Yes. So that's an argument that you we
used to need things to kind of like
raise money or like move through the
world and now increasingly you can just
have attention and the idea is that
attention is increasingly becoming an
infrastructure of sorts that people have
to build upon. So no longer is the
economic foundation something like land
which is very physical, labor, a person,
capital, actual money, it's attention
and then narrative. So the story that
you tell to gain that attention is the
capital that inflates the attention
itself. And then increasingly now we
have speculation on top of both of
those. So speculation is kind of like
the operating layer, right? So it
operationalizes the attention and makes
it move throughout the world because now
you can attach actual dollar signs how
much attention you're gathering. So
things like production markets would be
the best example. So Poly Market has a
Substack and they wrote about uh a man
that bet on Mumami in the uh Maril race
in New York and he made like $300,000
off of it. And what he was doing was
essentially seeing where attention was
going and trying to make inverse bets
off that and seeing where the story the
narrative was wrong. And he was able to
operationalize that attention going in
the wrong direction, the stories being
incorrect through speculation via
predictive markets. Does that make
sense?
Yeah. So this is sort of a weird way it
sounds to me in which I think we think
of the attentional economics and
revolution as being primarily about
digital media but it sounds to me like
the way you're describing it I think
this is true is that it's like the weird
bastard child of digital media and
financialization of everything that it's
the ability to endlessly bet right the
the venture capitalists are betting the
day traders are betting the crypto
people are betting in a way when we just
give things our time we are sort of
making a a bet about what's important
cuz right because that's like where like
so influencers right you get money
through views like that's the
monetization of the attention economy
more or less but now we're able to bet
on where attention goes so like
influencer it's a very boxed situation
like you have a video that does a
million views you make your money blah
blah blah but people can like bet on how
much views your video might get and so
that creates this multi-dimensional
aspect to the attention economy Well,
and creates a feedback loop, too. I
mean, polling has always had a bit of
this quality, but I really watched with
Mum Donnie and Trump. Um, the way the
betting markets drive now feedback loops
where people see something happening and
then they begin posting more on it and
then the thing begins happening more and
you can see it in the betting market and
so they begin posting more on it or
giving more money to it or whatever it
might be.
And one, it turns attention into
capital, right? Because money follows
it. And two, it just makes it realer.
Yeah. Right. It is a way of
something that's starting small can
become exponential just through these
feedback loops. You know, again, if it's
sufficiently kind of viral and people
can pick keep picking it up.
Yeah. And they do because it gathers
like when money goes like attention
follows. When attention goes, money
follows. And so it does create this like
really quite nice like in terms of
structure, not nice in terms of effects,
but like nice feedback loop that's
really interesting to watch. And it was
very interesting to watch, you know,
what happened with um Mum Donnie and the
prediction markets and how that moved
him. And increasingly prediction
markets, I think it's always kind of
been this way, but it's now what people
think, right? Like they're not betting
on what they think. They're betting on
what they think other people think. And
so they're essentially betting on the
attention economy itself and using the
stories that people are telling about
said attention economy to determine
where their money should go and then
more money follows it. It's crypto in a
sense.
But but so you said attention is a
foundational input. That's clearly true
for a certain set of products.
Does your theory of attention is as a
major infrastructural input. Does it say
anything about the big parts of the
economy that we just don't pay that much
attention to that don't have big
narratives around them or does that just
that's just sort of not part of this
theory?
So there's the physical world and
there's the digital world. The attention
economy really applies to the digital
world. There's elements of attention
that can serve the physical world. like
if care workers need a new policy
posture on them, like the more attention
that they can have on things like that,
the better cuz that's how you get things
done is a bunch of people talking about
it. But yes, the attention economy
primarily sits within the digital world
and the physical world for now is uh
free of it.
There's a real thing happening here, but
there's also a very speculative
attentional thing happening here.
One thing about AI as a technology
is that the leading figures of it
are very big influencers on social
media. Sam Alman is probably the most
masterful of the CEOs alongside Elon
Musk at driving attention to whatever he
wants it to to be on. But the world of
AI people are just extremely dominant on
social media, on YouTube, right? There's
just like AI is a technology, but it's
also a very compelling storyline
in a way that very few other
technologies have been.
How do you think that plays into this?
Yeah. I mean, the entire S&P 500 is a
bet on if the AI will make it, right?
And so there is a lot of money making
really big bets and there is a lot of
incentive for them to keep attention on
it and to like hype it up as much as
possible. Like I remember this one
interview that Sam Waltman did where he
talks about how AI is going to require a
reordering of the social contract. And
so to go back what we were talking about
at the beginning of the conversation
like when you hear something like that
you're like oh what does that mean for
me and the you know the 40 years I have
left on earth or 60 years or however
long. And so I I think for the AI
universe, they do a great job at keeping
attention on them. And like that's
actually one very useful part about the
image generation and the video
generation is that you're able to direct
a lot of eyeballs towards your AI model
and then also use that AI model in in a
workplace. Hype is very valuable. So
there's a company called Cluey that
raised have you heard?
Um yeah, they raised $15 million from
A16Z. They're interesting. Um they have
a lot of really
uh how would you say engaging videos and
uh you know they were able to raise a
bunch of money just on the back of those
videos for essentially what is an AI
note taker. Um, but they were able to
capture attention. They were able to
capture the $15 million because in this
world where chatbt or open AI and
anthropic are so far ahead, the people
that will win in the AI world are those
that can differentiate. And the way that
you differentiate is through attention.
And then you get the speculation.
What do they do to capture attention?
Those videos. Um, Roy Lee, who's a CEO,
uh, he drew a um, can I say deck?
Sure. He drew a deck on the whiteboard.
So it's just like very
they have this like line cheat on
everything, right?
Yeah. And so it it's just cheat on
everything is is very inflammatory
within itself, right? And so they
mastered attention like you know they
got two newsletters out of me and and
plenty of think pieces out of other
people as well. And it was just based
off these videos. It's it's Jake Paul.
Jake Paul the boxer. He was a big
YouTuber. He was like one of the first
Gen Z influencers and he got very
popular through stunts and virality and
you see startups now copying this Jake
Paul playbook. We're going to be in your
face. We're going to be loud because in
a world where it's difficult to
differentiate AI products because it's
all essentially the same technology
underneath. You have to be able to draw
eyeballs and that's where you get the
speculative capital from venture
capital.
Here's a question I have even when I
just try to think about the way
attention and speculation are matter in
the economy. You know the old book James
Scott seeing like a state, right? That
the state has to make things legible to
itself. The algorithm has to make things
legible to itself.
And so those of us following along in
life through the algorithm will see the
things that are legible to the
algorithm. Clearly is very legible to
the algorithm. Yes. Right. Because it it
has this high engagement strategy.
On the other hand, 15 million bucks from
A16Z, it's nothing, right? On the on the
list of of AI investments, it's pennies.
And most of these companies making a ton
of money or or raising a ton of money,
many of them are in stealth mode because
they don't want other people copying
them, right? There's a lot happening
that is less intentionally salient, but
because it's not visible to the
algorithm, like we can't even really
discuss it.
True. It is very hard to tell when you
are overestimating
the role of attention in the economy
because the nature of the things that
get attention is you can see them more
clearly and there all these things that
that that don't um like like an
economics of attention needs to be able
to to distinguish when attention is also
like misleading you like how do you
think about that?
Yeah. Yeah. No, it's something I've
thought a lot about because I do, you
know, I do make videos on social media
and so I can fall into the trap of
thinking that that's the entire
universe. I think most people who use
social media can fall into that trap.
But there are a lot of companies outside
of the attentional universe that are
creating very real things. But I I think
what's been really interesting about the
Trump presidency is that he's expedited
the value of attention. And so I think
for him like attention is the value
creation. and it's not like the path to
value creation.
And so he has also established some sort
of playbook within politics that people
are starting to follow. And so there's
always going to be pockets of the
attention economy that are outside of
the attention economy, right? Um but I I
think more and more things are falling
within the purview, including um
politics increasingly. You
you have this line on Trump. He said,
"Trump is the first human algorithm
hybrid president governing via truth,
social truths, bond market reactions,
and direct market signals. A feedback
loop in a suit. Tell me about that."
I mean, the guy, he uses Truth Social,
his his policy platform. Like, we got an
announcement about a bombing of Iran via
Truth Social. And so I think for him
like he's able to use this platform that
he owns as a way to spread messages um
and get his point of view out there to
move markets which are quite responsive
to him to give his opinions on Elon Musk
to give his opinions on the big
beautiful bill and tariffs and so he
uses truth social just as an extension
of the presidency in a way that we've
never really seen a president do like
we've never had a president who tweets
so much or truths so much. I suppose
I refu I refuse to use these stupid um
bespoke verbs. You had another line that
I thought was very perceptive on this
where he said that the way things
typically have worked is that events
create narratives and the way they seem
to work in the Trump presidency is that
narratives create events.
I I think it's all kayfabe to a certain
extent.
What is kayfabe? There's the theatrics
like this the show must go on type of
thing in in WWE like they're always in
character. They're always doing stunts
and performance and it's just always a a
show. There's this great essay by Roland
Bars that I always talk about, but it's
called the world of wrestling and how
increasingly elements of politics them,
you know, have elements of of wrestling.
Like there's this uh theatric pursuit of
justice, this theatric pursuit of truth,
and you can kind of align it with like
how wrestling has a heel, and there's
always a bad guy that you have to
defeat. And then you defeated the bad
guy, and he did a great job. And now on
to your next opponent, right? Which is
kind of how Trump moves throughout his
presidency. Like he he got bored of the
war essentially.
Yeah. I feel like this is one of the
really interesting things that that it
feels like we get a spectacle and then
we move on from it because the policy
never had a strategy. So
attention economy stuff.
Yeah. So did we destroy Iran's nuclear
like there was a like a three-day news
cycle here? It felt to me or 4-day news
cycle. We bombed Iran. Then there was an
intelligence leak that we only set it
back by a few months. Then there was a
Trump adversation yelling at the
intelligence leak
and now we just moved on to debating the
big beautiful bill. Yeah,
it's not that past policy efforts didn't
create spectacles. They did, but the
spectacles were yolked to some kind of
strategy and end goal. I mean, the
tariffs have had this feeling too that
like what are what is our tariff policy
at this point and what is it trying to
achieve? Does anybody actually know?
Could anybody give me an account of our
global tariffs and where they think
they're going to be in 30 days or 60
days or 90 days? There's something with
the way things rise and fall now that
genuinely feels
different. It's like once you've gone
through like the big story line, it's
like the thing is gone. Even if the
policy has not been decided or the goal
has not been reached, it's it's like the
decay rate
Yeah.
has really accelerated.
Yeah. No, it feels that way. And I think
it creates so much fatigue and people
that are paying attention, right? Cuz
you're like, "Oh my gosh."
And um I think a big part of that is the
attention economy. Like Trump, he gets
it. He gets how people work. He gets how
people consume information. And he knows
that in order to keep people engaged,
you have to keep moving the story line
along. Like the guy is a reality TV
star, literally. And so I I think he
understands that better than any
president we've ever had. And there are
valuable parts to that playbook, right?
like it is there is value in using
social media as a tool to spread a
message and to capture people's
attention and then you know send them
somewhere rather than just dragging them
along to the next story line. But yeah,
I mean I I'm curious for you. You know,
you said past policies have had some
sort of spectacle like have you ever
seen anything quite like what we're
seeing now?
No, but it's hard for me to describe the
difference because
I don't know. It's like the Obamacare
fight was like a year.
Mhm.
But it was driving for a year to an
outcome.
There is this way in which it feels like
the Trump administration loses interest
before the outcome is reached.
What you just said a minute ago was that
Trump gets us better than anybody alive.
He gets it. He gets how to engage you.
Let Let me try this on you because I I
do believe it. Everybody always says,
everybody, but you know, pundits,
he's trying to distract you. The Trump
administration is trying to distract
you. Muzzle velocity. They're flooding
the zone. Trump isn't trying to distract
you. Trump is himself distracted.
He doesn't understand this better than
anybody else does. He embodies it. He
has like, as you say, like you said, a
feedback loop in a suit, but I don't
even think it's that. He's just very,
very, very distractable. Listen to him
talk.
The way his mind works, he cannot follow
often times the thing he is talking
about for more than a couple of
sentences before he wanders down another
pathway. In the first term,
somebody who worked for him told me that
to try to brief Donald Trump on policy
is like chasing squirrels around a
garden.
Yeah.
They just keep running in different
directions.
And so I I think there's a sense
sometimes that that Donald Trump is
conceptually in control of events,
right? That that he has got some plan,
but I I don't think it's that at all. I
think that he starts things and then
loses interest. Now, in cases where
there's like a like another part of the
administration or the government that
will try to like drive the thing to its
conclusion, it keeps going, right?
Congress has a a process to try to
decide if this bill is going to pass or
not pass.
Um or Steven Miller is very focused on
his hatred of immigrants.
Yes.
And he's going to keep using machinery
of government to prosecute that as long
as he can.
But Trump just sort of phases in and out
of how much he cares about things. Like
what happened to Doge, right? Like that
was like a big project and Elon Musk was
running it. It very much could have
continued
at its level of aggression after Elon
Musk left. A lot of people thought it
would, but we actually don't hear nearly
as much about government reform and
waste and fraud and abuse as we did a
couple months ago because clearly just
Trump has moved on and other parts of
the administration has moved on and
nobody actually owns the thing to to
drive it.
I think that the the difficulty with
Trump is that he he really is like the
algorithm
and the algorithm just like lives for
the moment. It's about the current thing
and when the current thing moves on, it
moves on and so does he. Yeah. No, I
mean that's a good point. So it sort of
refutes the idea like, oh, he's not
doing it on purpose. Like it's just how
he is. And I I think like part of it
might be that, you know, perhaps I have
a hope that some elements of it is on
purpose because then it feels like
there's more control happening versus
like it is really just a a fun house
going on in in the government. Um
because like obviously things have very
lasting impacts and I think it you know
your point he is the algorithm like
there is that element of instant
gratification that you see within him
like if he cuz he wasn't able to fix the
war he was like ah never mind and uh but
like now what's going to happen to Iran?
Are they going to continue to develop
these weapons? And what does that mean?
And there's all of these real answers
that we still have to seek. And because
I think everyone does get kind of yanked
around in terms of trying to follow
what's happening next, it does create a
very distracted, overwhelmed, and
fatigued public. And then you have
things like the big beautiful bill a
bunch of Americans haven't even heard
about. So when you then get to to
thinking about okay like imagine Trump
as like a golem summoned by the
attention economy
we are being governed by the human
embodiment of the Twitter algorithm. I
actually believe this.
So then it creates this interesting
question because on the one hand Trump
is completely dominant over events and
on the other hand he's not that
successful. He's unpopular. I mean,
we're going to see what happens with the
the big beautiful bill,
but his ability to to actually drive all
the way to the outcomes he wants is
often weak. Um, it looks like
Republicans are headed for a pretty bad
midterm. Tom Tillis, the North Carolina
senator, just said he's not running for
for reelection. Um, that
because Trump threatened to primary him.
Because Trump threatened to primary him.
But but that's exactly what I mean. Like
Trump had
Trump got mad at Tom Tillis for like a
second because Tillis is not going to
support the level of Medicaid cuts in
the in the bill, threatened to primary
him, putting at risk a North Carolina
Senate seat that could become the
deciding line between Democrats
recapturing the Senate and not.
That's not a person acting
out of anything more than a momentary
incentive.
That is a person who like is not
thinking forward into his own future.
Yeah.
Like the whole Trump experience in a way
is like what would it be like to really
live in the algorithm? What does the
algorithm miss? What can't it see? Like
attention and its opposite.
Yeah.
Like are simultaneously more salient
than they ever were before.
Yeah, totally. I mean, and it kind of
like so Trump Yes. he's like very
focused on, you know, I guess he's a
squirrel, so the next nut or whatever.
And uh I think you know that gets into
the digital economy aspect of things and
then the physical world kind of falls
apart because then we get science cuts,
we get cuts to solar power, um all these
things that have real world
consequences, but because it's not
within that algorithm, because it's not
aesthetically pleasing or whatever, you
know, it gets ignored and forgotten
about. And I think that is like the
biggest consequence of the Trump
presidency is that he seems to forget
that the physical world needs investment
just as much as his digital presence.
Give me your theory of friction.
So basically the idea of friction is
that there is value in things being like
a tiny bit difficult. And so when we use
digital tools like there really isn't a
lot of friction. Like dating apps, it
makes dating very easy. Uh Door Dash
makes things coming to your house very
easy. So you can kind of have this like
frictionless existence. You also have an
algorithm that's designed around you and
so you can be served anything within
your echo chamber and you don't ever
have to if you don't want to kind of
think outside of whatever you want to be
thinking about. Whereas in the physical
world there's a lot of friction. So if
anybody's flown over the summer it might
have been a challenging experience
because we don't have enough air traffic
controllers. We don't have enough people
doing maintenance on the plane. And it
it's just like little things like that
that you know feel like they should be
simpler and they feel like they should
be running smoother and they're not
because they're not part of the digital
universe that gets so much money and
investment. And so it's this idea that
there's a bunch of friction in the
physical world and perhaps not enough in
the digital world. Do you think those
things are are connected that there's
become so much friction in the real
world in the real world of building
things and accomplishing things that
it's created this like flight to the
digital world that that people are
overinvested in the digital world
because we have done such a bad job
managing friction in the real world.
Yeah. I mean it's easier to be online.
You don't have to like reckon with stuff
unless you want to. And so I think you
can create this curated experience. Like
my boyfriend talks about it all the
time. He's like you can just have this
perfect appearance and like what your
and people write about this too. Like
your Instagram page is your best moments
ever. And so you can kind of have this
life that isn't your life. Whereas in
the physical world, you might just be
dealing with like headache after
headache. Like how do I pay this bill?
How do I make rent this month? You know,
how do I make sure I'm still succeeding
in my job? All of those things. So for
you there's a a connection between
friction and meaning or frictionlessness
and meaninglessness.
Yeah.
How do you how do you draw that?
I mean I think the idea is that when
things are a little too easy, it's tough
to find meaning in it. Like if the way I
think it might be best to visualize it
is Wall-E. So, like if you're able to
kind of lay back and, you know, watch a
screen on your little chair and just
have smoothies delivered to you, like
it's it's tough to find meaning within
that kind of wall-ally lifestyle because
everything is just a bit too simple.
Like the the good parts of life often
come through the hardest struggles. And
I I think that that is where people do
find a lot of meaning. And that's what
all the greats, you know, write about is
like the struggle is the path. um you
know, keep pushing the rock up the hill,
more or less. Uh and so I I think that's
how I think about it, but I I don't have
data to back that up.
No, but you do have literary analysis,
which I've enjoyed. Uh you have a great
piece or I thought it was a great piece
on the Screw Tape Letters.
Best book,
which is Well, why don't you describe
what that book is for people who have
not heard of it?
Yes. Um it's one of my favorite books in
the whole world. Have you read it?
I have not read it.
Oh, you should. You should read it. Um,
it was actually it's one of my
recommendations over here. Uh, but it's
it's this demon called Screw Tape and
he's writing these letters to his demon
nephew, Wormwood. And it's all about how
you demonize this human. So, Wormwood
has a human within his care and his
whole thing is like to bring him into
hell and away from God. And the way that
you demonize somebody like you would
think it would make them you'd kill
somebody like you would want them to go
kill somebody, right? Like that's how
you would think of it, but it's really
just keeping that person stagnant. So
all of Screw Tape's letters to Wormwood
are like, "No, just keep him not feeling
anything. Keep him in one place. Like
don't let him fall in love. Don't let
him get passionate. Just keep him
baseline. Keep him bored. Don't keep
him, you know, doing his prayers. Like
let him forget all meaning and purpose
within his life. And that's when he'll
come to us, the demons." And then
towards the end it's, you know, Screw
Tape gets mad at Wormwood and they eat
each other essentially. Um,
spoiler.
Yeah. But like it's a it's a good um
metaphor for kind of how badness moves
through the world. Like badness does
usually end up eating other forms of
badness. Like we kind of not to call
Trump and Musk demons, but like they're
infighting now. Like like Trump is
threatening to deport Musk. And so like
bad, not that they're bad actors per se,
but like people who are trying to find
perhaps
um bad parts of people are always going
to find that in another person and they
turn on each other eventually.
Did did you listen to my colleague Ross
Det's uh podcast with Peter Teal?
I have seen clips. I'm not listen to the
whole thing yet.
So So this is Teal's view of the
Antichrist largely, right? when he this
is sort of his theory of um
we will be lulled
into the antichrist one world government
by the environmentalists promising us
peace and safety and there's something
very strange about it and he's like out
there like funding palunteer and
surveillance technologies that sure seem
to me like what you what would create a
one world dangerous government
but I guess from this you know screw
tape uh letters
Like if you're going to imagine that the
worst thing for society is stagnation,
that the true path away from godliness
is a kind of decadence,
that that there's a connection between
those two those two theories.
Yeah. But I would say like the way that
CS Lewis is is writing Screw Tape or at
least the way that I interpreted it was
that if you do have people that are you
know numb to the world around them it
becomes difficult for them to push back
like if there is you know a a palunteer
takeover or something like that. So I
think the two worlds can coexist.
And there's also the sense that there's
some kind of corrosive
meaninglessness
in the society we're building in the
absence of certain kinds of struggles,
certain kinds of social structures. I'm
not sure we know how to pull those
things apart. But like when you said at
the beginning of this conversation that
the thing you hear a lot is nihilism
from young people and the thing in a way
that AI feels to me like it pushes is
nihilism right is a kind of sense of
like well if this can do so much of my
work for me like what am I exactly
like it I don't think any of us know how
to
put this on a chart
but it certainly feels to me like people
are acting from a sense of its truth.
Yeah. It's like one of those things that
you can feel when you talk to people
like there is this element of of fear
and worry and you know one thing about
the US is we don't really have a social
safety net and so like if you do fall
because of AI you know it's just how do
you climb your way back up who knows and
uh so I I think people are trying to
find truth and meaning while having you
know this technology that's incredibly
hypn hypnotic and will get more so
hypnotic with things like AI that also
might take your job. And so it's it's a
bunch of forces all at once that is
perhaps a bit too much for humans. like
we really haven't evolved that much
since we were hunter gatherers and now
we're being tasked with uh like in my in
this hotel I stayed in in New York, they
had all these headlines on the wall from
the New York Times and it was like
great paper,
great paper, but it was you know people
are looking for Amelia Heheart and
basically everything from like 1912 to
now like they had just these headlines
in this picture but and I was looking at
that and it was like the saddest
headlines ever and I was like I feel
like I see all of those headlines just
in one day now, you know, and it's like
that that was like a hundred years of
headlines and I feel like I see all of
that just in a day and that's a lot for
the human brain to process considering
we haven't really kept up
evolutionarily.
You know, there there's something in
this. You you often make the the
argument that everything feels like
crypto now.
And that feels relevant somehow here
where crypto has this quality
of so much
energy and hustle and money and
attention
all circling a kind of nothing at the
core.
uh particularly as I think the more
idealistic dreams of what it could do
have faded and now it's just pretty
clearly a vehicle for speculation
and there's this way in which I think a
lot of things are developing a little
bit of that quality like politics
sometimes develops that quality like it
does really matter but there is this
kind of nihilism people can sense in it
that I think is really depressing right
it really really depresses people and
the economy right if Do you feel like
you've put in all this work in your
education and your learning and now the
deal you were promised isn't really
there
and we're inventing a like a computer
program that can write your essays and
do your learning
and produce the kinds of things we are
asking you to produce better than you
can this like so you're still running
really fast. You're still trying to get
grades. you're still, you know, like
trying to achieve the thing, but what
what is at the core of that, right? If
it becomes a little bit less obvious.
Mhm.
And I think hollowess is something
people
sense really well and is very very very
dangerous.
Yeah. No, I mean I I think so. I used to
work in crypto and was like once very
excited about it and I was like this
thing's going to be cool and we're going
to have alternatives and it's and and it
has increasingly become just purely a
speculative asset and there is that
element of hollowess in it. Like I know
a lot of people still work in crypto and
they're like working on very cool
projects and there's a lot of optimism
sometimes but you do see a lot of people
in the space being like well what is
behind all like what's behind the screen
door or the curtain and I think that
sort of speculative hollowess as you've
pointed out does show up in how people
are trying to navigate their lives
because it's like what is next? What
does this mean? And I think part of it
is this like broken ladder problem,
right? So like you graduate from
college, do you get a job? 23% of
Harvard MBAs were unemployed 3 months
after graduation. Those are the cream of
the crop, right? If they can't find jobs
like that may be tough for you and
you're like you just see all this data
and you're like, oh no, housing, um
career progression because people are
taking longer and longer to retire. Uh
and so I think all of those points can
create that feeling of hollowess like
what is it all for?
I have this sense that we are
undergoing a kind of correction
where
interest and attention are moving back
into
things that are just more difficult and
more real. Yeah,
like I would not have thought I would
publish a book on like zoning reform and
the policies under which we can build
transmission lines and it would become
like a big national bestseller and throw
off endless discourse and you know we're
talking the day after Gavin Newsome
signed a bill you know really really
changing the California Environmental
Quality Act right so things are
happening there's so much energy around
even just a conversation about how do we
do things in the real world, right? It
was pent up,
right? It's not my book that did this.
It's that people wanted
there to be attention on this and the
book was a focusing event.
And even like with my thing with
abundance, I've noticed like the
discourse that you would find if like
the only place you followed it is people
screaming at each other on X, like it's
a very polarized discourse with like
aggressive defenders and, you know,
aggressive critics. Whereas then in like
the world as I watch it actually filter
through it's like I find moderates
picking up parts of it. I find leftists
like Zor Mani picking up parts of it. I
find Gavin Newsome doing parts. It's
just everything is much more complex
than the simulacra. Somehow you need to
fuse the the dynamics of the attention
economy and the real economy or the
dynamics of performative politics and
and real politics.
So um eventually you know the next
Democratic or maybe even non-democratic
president will be better at managing
both performative policym and spectacle
which obviously Joe Biden was
not even in the game on
with
strategies to actually try to get things
done right which he was better on. I
think that, you know, attention has
become like more like capital and you
need to know how to raise it,
right?
But just like with capital to succeed in
the long run, you also need to know how
to spend it.
Yeah.
And I think right now there's a lot more
sophistication in the raising of
attention than the spending of
attention.
Sure. And I think that's going to be a a
it's like a societal learning we're all
going through together and not
painlessly.
But I wonder if like pretty impressive
things can't lie on the other side of
it, right? If we could get some some
politicians who understood both both
sides of it, more business leaders who
understood both sides of it. The thing
I'll say about Open AI and Sam Alman, as
I said a few minutes ago, this true for
Elon Musk, too. Sam Alman very very good
with attention but OpenAI keeps
releasing impressive products. Elon Musk
very good with attention but SpaceX
keeps doing impressive things in space.
That there is this way in which like the
future belongs not to the influencers
but to the the influencers who can
deliver.
It's maybe not enough to deliver without
being an influencer but it's also not
enough to be an influencer without being
able to to deliver. I think that's my
optimistic take.
Yeah. I mean I think attention is a
precursor to power rather than a
byproduct now. So it's like as you're
saying like you know the more attention
that you can raise like narrative is a
form of capital mimetic storytelling is
really useful and then that way you can
like build all of that around yourself
and then it makes getting into power a
bit easier. The way that I think about
it is there's extractive speculation and
then there's strategic speculation. So
extractive would be like, you know,
Trump kind of dragging people from one
thing to the next or, you know, Clo's
marketing campaign just sort of like
dragging people along and then they end
up somewhere where they're like, where
am I? But strategic would be, you know,
like your your book, which got a lot of
attention, got a lot of discourse, you
know, reaching Gavin Newsome, right? And
like that was a really good use of the
attention economy. I don't think it was
intentional on your part, but it was
incredible like the amount of discourse.
And then now you've you've changed
policy which is the ultimate goal,
right?
I I I don't want to take too much credit
for this. It was hopefully helpful. But
but a lot of people shout out to
fair. But a lot of people working on
this for a long time before
of course. But you know what I'm saying?
But do you get what I'm saying, right?
Like like there has to be an as you're
saying like there has to be an end goal,
but you can still use the framework of
the attention economy to get people to
that end goal. And that's what has to
happen. like the the the bones are still
important and I think they're not going
away for a bit but the question will be
where do they go from here and you have
to be able to send them somewhere
and then always our final question what
are three books you'd recommend to the
audience
yes so I really like CS Lewis and so I'd
recommend the screw tape letters and
then I'd also recommend a grief observed
which is by him also um it's like a
really nice read on grief cuz grief can
feel very lonely when you're going
through it like If you've ever gone
through a loss, it's just it's
devastating and you feel like you're the
only person that's kind of experienced
something so big and heavy and people
are telling you it's going to be fine
and you're like, "No, it's not." And he
just writes in a way that makes you
realize you're not alone in that. And my
last book recommendation is Jonathan
Livingston Seagull by Richard Bach,
which is about this seagull that you
know, everyone's like, you're never
going to be able to fly that far. you're
never going to be able to do all of
this. And he just takes it upon himself
to fly. And I won't ruin the ending, but
it's it's this really nice read on the
power of people taking a chance, but
then what happens when we forget why we
took that chance in the first place.
Callus Ke, thank you very much.
Thank you.
[Laughter]
Hey,
[Music]