So we're joined with Shabosha now and also Misha. Shabosha, you were just telling me about, you were looking into conlangs. Tell us about this.
So conlang is actually a way of, it's a written language which is not generally made by the civilization or anything. It's just constructed language. It's short for constructed languages basically.
And people find out interesting rules of grammar and tries to create concepts that could, you know, be as well be used for complete conversations.
The interesting part that got me, that got me interested in conlang is that the ideas and concepts could be very nonlinear.
And also one aspect that caught my attention was UNLWS where the writing system is two dimensional, which is similar to hieroglyphics,
but you can think of like letters or connecting in terms of a graph like things where there are notes and things can connect to each other.
And it could mean different things under different contexts. So you have to follow.
But I'm not, it's not actually two dimensional. It's graph based. It's like a nonlinear graph based kind of thing.
So explain that a little more. So English, I sort of read it left to right.
Left to right.
Some languages go, go the other direction. Japanese goes down.
Yeah.
Is this both?
Arabic goes, yeah.
Is it both?
It's not a grid like structure. You can fit it into a grid like, but it has like, you can draw circles and embed like a higher concept with a symbol and then embed smaller concepts.
So it doesn't have an alphabet for a syllable. It has an alphabet for fish and fish under different contexts might mean something that you're talking about ocean or things like that.
So they have a more nonlinear writing system rather than breaking up into syllables and phonetics where you start building up objects, naming them and things like that.
Is it made out of sounds or is it made out of sort of ideograms?
It is currently, it's just a written language. It's not, it doesn't have.
There's no way to speak it.
There's no way to speak it.
But there's another language, which is called the shortest language in the world, which is called Toki Pona.
And it has, I think, 256 characters as total alphabets.
Words.
Words.
Yeah.
Total words and that's it. That's what they use to describe the language.
That's convenient.
That's very cool. And that's why I was looking into there are other languages, which is not Toki Pona, but it reminds me of ancient sigils and that Vikings used to put their circles and patterns in them.
Hold on. Toki Pona asks, when was that created?
It was created by Sonja Lange back in 2007. It is like, she started out with only 125 characters, but then it got expanded to more words.
Words, like a dictionary.
Like a dictionary. And it's one of the most popular, um, conlangs of many others. And I think, uh, Dr.
Is that, can that one be spoken?
It's, uh, spoken. It has its own community. People are speaking. Not only speaking, they are making songs in it.
Uh-huh.
They're making poems. There are translated work of the whole, I think, uh, The Wizard of Oz completely translated in Toki Pona.
Really?
So yeah, it's, it's one of the most vibing communities, unlike UNLWS. Uh, but yeah, I've been, and Toki Pona has also, uh, many other, uh, variants coming out of, so they have like, uh, like the, uh, tablets that you would see in Chinese communications.
So they would arrange the tablets in like a three-dimensional configuration and it has its own name. So it's like a written system for Toki Pona.
It's a three-dimensional language. So you can do a lot more things, but one thing I think, uh, Toki Pona would be useful thinking about conlangs is like how grammar is, uh, symmetrical or how grammar can be condensed or how rules could be expanded.
And we can cheat in terms of not always thinking about phonetics and alphabets, just go to fish. Because how often we think about phonetics and things like that.
So can, uh, thinking about non-linear way of representing language could rescue us in some sort of this expanse of millions of parameters that comes into LLMs.
Do you think this is like chess or checkers or sudoku, sort of a brilliant intellectual activity? Or could we do something like engineering, medicine, law, practically or usefully using these kinds of things like Toki Pona?
So I think it's Toki Pona actually started out like a spiritual kind of way. What's the simplistic way of human expression? How to make it very as simple as the simplest level of human expression?
Um, so it has some sort of, um, spiritual side. It can be taken up as a hobby and other things. But I have been thinking about, uh, when, uh, Andre Carpathi dropped this, um, uh, two hour video on his website about tokenization.
And I used to think in my mind, what about Toki Ponaization?
Instead of thinking about words and tokens, we can't think about words in Toki Pona's version of vector where there's a non-linear connections.
Um, it's not just like which word, it's not like a bag of words kind of scenario where in a sentence I'm always looking, it's, uh, closest neighbor and what I'm pairing it up with.
But we can think about as, uh, human language expressions, which words, um, kind of find its meaning with, in, in a spectrum of other meanings dancing around, not just pairs.
And it could condense down a lot of information in a non-linear perspective.
It's a throw in the woods. It's not very clear cut.
But I think Con Lang would have a very enormous impact in terms of a more of semantic reasoning and, and what makes us pretty much like the, the feeling aspect of it.
Well, I don't know how familiar you are with Unlaws.
No, tell me more. I think I've seen it.
So Unlaws, the thing that really is craziest to me is that words are essentially shapes, like calligraphic shapes, but a fundamental part of the language is the artistry that you put into it.
Yes. And you can actually make a fractal out of it.
So you can have a big word that represent and you can actually make a, like a smaller word that's reverbing inside it.
Would, would this be like qualifiers on the word or, or just like emotional, you know, context?
Well, it's, it's an additional layer of expression.
Yeah.
It's calligraphy, but with some sort of semantic meaning. It's like poetry as art, if you will.
So like, like verbal English supports this. In other words, I can speak angrily or, you know, and in other words I can put a layer of emotion, emotional context when I pronounce the words.
Do you think that's that in a graphical way? Or would it support it?
It does support it. In fact, it's fundamental.
So not just emotional context, but adding additional meaning.
And artistry.
So I don't know what kind of expressions they put in terms of, because I've been only looking at trying to understand the grammar as of now.
But how much they have vocabulary encompassing emotions and things like that, I do not know.
But they have translated poetry for the Francis, I forgot, like the Francis, John Francis, like a prayer.
Yeah.
So they have translated as well.
Yeah.
They have many translated works.
So I think they have a scope for that. And I have to look into more of the structure.
What kind of more importance that comes into it.
But for example, there's like one thing I found out, like there was a structure of fish.
And then there was like a loop that tries the symbolization of eat.
And then there's like another character that qualifies the fish that kind of joins as a graph on the fish.
What kind of fish it is. It's big. And who is eating? I'm eating.
So it's like me, then the character. There's no qualifier for I, me or things like that.
It's just like a self-referential object sitting over there with a loop that kind of qualifies what kind of relation I have,
which is a verb. And then it has a relation that this is the object that's getting eaten.
So it kind of parses, like we think about language in terms of a relation, like it's a verbal relation or a qualifying relation.
Things like that are very like, they took that aspects of that language and made it in terms of like getting rid of specific alphabets.
They kind of look into the specific grammar.
Do you think learning this language or even learning about this language has changed how you think?
I haven't gotten too much deeply into learning the language, but I have a feeling that languages do alter the way you think.
And it gives you the capacity to, there's a fundamental thing about ourselves that I've been exploring called thought forms.
And the way you think.
Annie Bassler.
I think.
Yeah.
Right?
No, I think it's Charles W.
Yeah.
And then with Annie, they wrote it together.
Annie Besant.
Yeah, yeah.
That's right.
Some of the earliest works that have been put out are by Charles W.
There's some interesting sort of graphical representations of music in that.
Yeah, there's like when you hear music or thinking about music, how your mind is thinking about it could be like an aura or things like that,
that could be perceived in terms of what I call the clairvoyance or design the term for it, I think remote viewing.
But let's, let's roll back from psychic elements to common things that like there are aspects the way we think and it has its own shape and how it affects.
Um, and it's kind of fundamental in terms of like, um, as it goes back to as far as computation and computing, the way we talk, it arises to like more computational level.
Like when cells are interacting, it's like, um, there's no language.
It looks like, like, um, a chemical reaction, but once enough chemicals and complexities are formed and there's another form to it.
And then higher forms arises, multicellularity.
And then from chemistry, we move on to communications and then communication states, which is beyond like human perception because now we are becoming a part of the system.
And we are arising from parts and then we are again finding ourselves in the parts.
And then you can think about like how you shape this in interactions in terms of what elements you pick in the computation.
For example, you were talking about moving from just our, uh, you know, one bit, uh, system computing.
Uh huh.
What is it called?
Bit bit flip is one of them.
Bit bit flip.
Yes.
So we are moving from like, uh, where we used to have like normal computation, but then we are moving towards other computing system.
So I, you've done a lot of work in cellular automata.
Yeah.
And in that game of life, for example, we get these, these gliders, these little critters that go across.
Game of life, we get this critters.
Exactly.
So do you think that thought forms are sort of like the critters on the grid of our, of our mind?
Exactly.
So that's what I was exactly referring to, uh, in a very broad sense that our thoughts are, can be thought of this like a fundamental, some sort of a glider or some sort of a fundamental computation that supports it.
And then we can actually, the, uh, forms that shapes, uh, takes place can, uh, culminate and, uh, emerge into different concepts, different rules, things that are, we cannot predict.
It's like a computation.
So in some sense, you can think it has like a, like a mind of its own.
So loosely, very loosely speaking.
So, yeah.
I'm curious.
You mentioned mind of its own.
I was thinking earlier, you asked me, like, do I think that languages are alive?
And now I'm realizing there's a different meaning to that.
Do you think languages are life forms?
I do.
I think they're, well, I think the question will also be, are the critters on the game of life board, are they life forms?
I think they might be similar.
There are these, I like this word I mentioned earlier, spontaneities, that I came across in looking up some, actually some religious text.
Um, and I like that term because it's sort of a thing, an entity, but it's spontaneous in a sense.
Um, is our brain like a substrate, like the game of life, and it supports these gliders and, and glider guns and critters and all these sort of things.
Is language like that? Are the words alive?
Actually, it's kind of funny, though, that you mentioned, though, that it was, you were looking at a religious text.
And, it's strange because there's something inherent, inherently related about religion, language, and life.
In that, if you think like Esalen's even, the Rosetta Stone, if you will, of almost all languages, the most translated piece of text.
Lord's Prayer.
Is the Lord's Prayer, right?
Yeah.
Is the Lord's Prayer in heaven?
Where's that connection coming from?
Like, why is it that every religion is so intertwined with language?
You know, I was, I was thinking about prayers like Lord's Prayer.
And, is this a very highly evolved prompt, essentially?
Right?
Because if we look at it from one point of view, well, it's not that much content.
But, maybe this is actually, over millennia, evolved to be a very compressed prompt that actually might be organizing our brain in a way that we don't consciously understand.
Yeah.
It is like a higher form that affects the lower forms, that has melanin.
So, for example, like, I can't think about scratching my skin, and I'm affecting the cells.
Some of them can be dead cells, they are coming off, some could be alive.
So, again, like, it's the same thing with touch.
We are thinking about it, and then it has taken a form, and depending how important and impactful it will take hold in different minds.
It's like a virus, it's like a bacteria that has its own life, and the philosophy about it would change.
But, you know, it has its own structure that is using minds as a substrate to harvest itself and grow and spread.
And, yeah.
So, that's with the religion.
So, it has, some religions, like, has had a longevity, found hold in many minds, and some religious, like, lives like a recess in fewer minds.
And so, it's fighting for its space in the substrate of mind across, like, the population.
But what about the myths regarding language?
What about them?
Well, it reminds me just of what you were saying there, because I want to get to that, but it just reminded me real quick of this idea, this pattern in the game of life called the acorn.
Okay.
Which is, like, incredibly simple, and then it just spawns this enormous complexity.
Do things like Lord's Prayer, and does that spawn, you know, an entire sort of, you know, complex reality from a really small seed?
And maybe this goes back to Enki and the Namsha.
You want to bring that up?
I'll let you bring it up, you're the expert.
Well, I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Well, it's this idea of a sort of a linguistic program.
It might be the opposite of the acorn, in that it's a compact poem in Sumerian, and kind of like a tongue twister.
If we were actually to read and internalize this poem in Sumerian, we would no longer be able to understand language itself, like the Tower of Babel.
Yeah.
And, you know, this mythological character, Enki, he was responsible for these things called the maze.
It looks like the word me.
And I think of these as like programming, programs, right?
And some of the programs were how to bake bread, or how to run a kingdom, or, you know, how to create a family.
And I imagine a certain choreographed song and dance you could do, such that when you were done, you had bread in front of you.
Right?
And you don't really understand the process of making bread.
But, you know, like, you put your one foot in, one foot out, you do this sort of hokey pokey.
And in going from the wheat, to the grain, to the processing, you end up with bread.
And that's a very complex recipe that maybe you could encode as a poem or a song.
Songs are really easy to remember.
And it's very important the next generation knows how to make bread.
And so I wonder if these ancient Sumerian poems were essentially something like programmings.
And Enki would have been the GitHub repository for these sort of code.
I think, yeah, before, I don't know much about how computation was carried in terms of the computers we had.
But people had an understanding about, in terms of some sort of a software that we ran.
And if we could affect enough, we could change the society.
So people did think about poems and poetries and things about dancing, things about synchronization, the feeling of belonging as a tribe.
Because before we had society, we lived as a tribe.
So we gathered as a tribe.
And probably, like, tribe leaders sought after what unifies us, what would keep us together.
And probably, like, computation that is commonly ran among us would unify us.
That has its own whole, own meaning.
Like, that we are unified by the meaning, even though we are different from looks and we can have special skills.
So that fundamental thing actually, like, when tribes started coming together, kingdoms start to hold, things like that.
So more complex thing arose from that.
I'm not an historian and an expert to really go down to piece by piece.
But I think it has its meaning in terms of, like, people, ancient Sumerians definitely thought, like, we can use the power of language to harness unition.
And there's more to be done, like, because of emergence and emergent theory where the system is more than some of its parts.
So you were mentioning, though, a second ago that it was used to convey things that are so important and that things could emerge from that.
And before that, we were talking about cellular automaton reproducing.
And I was thinking about a certain thing with neural cellular automaton lizards.
And I was wondering if language is self-healing.
Well, you've got to explain the lizard thing. I know you both did a lot of work on that.
Explain the idea of a pattern that can repair itself.
So we are actually a pattern on ourselves that could repair ourselves.
So when you get cut, it can repair.
Like a lizard can grow its tail back.
Like a lizard could grow its tail back.
Now you would think about there is some sort of program that's running.
How does it know that the shape of the tail should be slender?
Why not grow an arm in that place?
What guides that?
So there is some sort of program running that kind of gives it a memory of how the parts are stored.
Alan Turing worked on this.
Alan Turing worked on this.
And he highlighted this concept called morphogenes.
Before even DNA was there, genetics was discovered.
I mean, genetics was done by Gregor Mendel.
So there are some aspects.
And that was more heredity.
Yeah, there's heredity.
But not like the Francis and Watson Prick model of the DNA was not already there.
And not that detailed.
It's interesting.
Schrodinger kind of predicted it a bit.
Okay.
Yeah.
I did not know that part, but that's very cool.
So in his mind, when Alan Turing was working on that, like, he found out that there are certain
fundamental elements that could be interacting in terms of a reaction and diffusion model
where they are reacting and then they are also diffusing out.
And that controls the dynamical system where one is competing for its existence with the other.
And when one is diminishing and another could be, like, pronounced in its expression and it can surpass.
So when you go through a cycle of that, like, with similar simple fundamental rules, you can see a pattern emerging.
And even if you, like, take a wipe and, like, distort that computation which you put by representing binaries and bits represent this color or that color.
If you nudge them a bit, it will, again, rearrange to form a zebra fish pattern or some other pattern.
So there is, like, a pattern.
Self-healing is a very complex form of a dynamical system that is kind of finding its own character.
So you can think about the lizard tail is, like, it's a character state.
Even if you chop it, it's going to, like, find its own pattern to that.
So as to your question, is language like this?
Yeah.
Right?
Does it choose its own form as it evolves?
Is language healing?
Is it self-healing or does it explode or does it disappear?
Right?
Enki would indicate that language can disappear altogether.
Go extinct in a sense.
Yeah.
Right.
Can we resurrect it?
And would it normally self-heal?
Like, what does it take for a language to go extinct?
Is it like Game of Life, which is very easy to go extinct?
Or is it like the blizzards, which are very hard?
And if we resurrect, say, Ancient Sumerian, are we then subject to the linguistic viruses that are in its mythology?
And will, once we get it to a, you know, like a little bit resurrected, will it actually grow back into its full form?
What do you guys think?
What do you think?
I think it's a great question.
I think it might.
It might.
It reminds me like in the movie, The Mummy kind of thing, and they get the books and it sort of resurrects a bunch of, you know, characters.
It all depends on a lot of other things like, again, for a virus to survive, it needs the substrate.
For a complex language to survive, it would need a mind that would appreciate or be a very, like a beholder of that culture.
Well, what about an A100, right?
What about an A100, right?
What about a GPU, right?
A GPU, yes.
Could a GPU, could the language model resurrect Sumerian?
Hmm.
So, again, the question back is that even if a GPU were to resurrect a language versus a human mind were to resurrect the language, what are we missing out in a human mind compared to A100 GPU?
The question is there.
And then, like, you need to think about what its resurrection would look like.
So, for example, Sanskrit is language that was the foundational to, existed in before, like, many, many years ago, before even Buddha existed.
Well, Sanskrit is the writing mechanism.
Yeah, writing mechanism.
And it was also a spoken thing.
Yeah.
It was a spoken language.
It kind of, it has many terms that, that got reincorporated in Hindi.
The whole writing system looks similar.
But it's very, the resurrection is a very different aspect.
And, for example, like, Vedana is like sorrow in Hindi, as a word in Sanskrit, which actually meant sensation.
So, things actually change, like, how they are going, going to get resurrected and how it would mean.
So, even if you resurrected, the resurrected coast might not recognize itself from home.
Right.
It might have its form and look like it's there, but it could be a complete abomination or a very, more rich.
Kind of like in English, when we talk about our feelings, we don't really mean the feeling of something.
We kind of tend to mean our emotional state.
Yeah, emotional state.
Exactly.
So, there are, there could, that's just one instance I learned in a meditation center where our language got changed, but there could be many other aspects.
So, an idea I had a long time ago was, how could you write a book such that if you only wrote the first half, it could finish the second half on its own?
Hmm.
And that the second half is meaningful.
Yeah, it's meaningful, exactly.
And that the second half is meaningful.
Do you think we're kind of getting that kind of book with a language model?
It's sort of the, the seed, the acorn, if you will, of an LLM, can it get it to continue its own story?
It does in, you know, a wave that sounds like a baby.
Almost repeats itself over and over.
So, it has that mechanism.
But I think what we are missing is, what's his name, the tiling system developed by Roger Penrose, where it's, the elements are simple, but you can get infinitely rich patterns.
The aperiodic tiling.
Yeah, the aperiodic that never repeats itself.
So, we need to find out where we are missing that, that tiling, you know, language bottle, like, why it's, like, finding its attractor.
So, we need to nudge its attractor to recycle itself in a baby-like known architecture to make it, like, inspirational, found its ways in swimming to waters that we haven't thought of.
What's a thought, like, that is not thought ever of, so.
But Penrose tilings aren't unique.
I don't think so. Am I wrong?
I don't really.
I think the patterns don't repeat itself.
They don't repeat.
There's, you can infinitely tile and you can never repeat if you infinitely tile.
But there's not one unique way for any given set of tiles, if I remember correctly, right?
Yeah, okay.
So, I think, in that sense, like, what I'm saying, that you have your fundamental concepts,
of the thought that forms the language would be same, but you're using to express different expressions.
Sure.
Which could be, like, a pattern that has not occurred before.
But it's not necessarily determined, like, there's not one way.
Yeah, we don't need a one way.
We are looking for, can it finish the book, and we don't want it to finish the rest of the book in one way.
It can have different endings to the book.
Like a choose your own adventure.
Choose your own adventure.
But wouldn't we want to know if there was, like, a book in a language that's the LLM, like, not something that the LLM is reproducing that it's seen before.
Right.
But if there is something that, ideally across LLMs, but even within the same one, would always reproduce the same content.
Oh, that's almost like a quine, in a sense, right?
No, no, no.
Not reproduce the first half.
No, I know.
It's analogous to, though.
It's like, it would go to the same attractor.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Where there's something inherent about the first half, and the language.
Okay.
So, you want it to be constrained, not a very random repetition, and random aperiodic.
So, there's, like, a constant you want to.
And I think one of the things that physics is about, I don't know who coded this, it's called,
Physics is the Study of Symmetries.
And symmetries are patterns.
Emily Noter.
Yeah, Emily Noter.
Yeah.
So, I think what you are kind of referring to is, like, instead of, so you're picking up on a very high-level symmetry.
Like, I want that symmetry to take hold in this pattern.
So, it's up to you how you choose, like, to concentrate that.
And you have to think about, like, yes, there could be some languages that has more symmetries that are guiding it.
Like, the Conlangs.
What are the symmetries?
I don't know.
It could take you from the common, the triangle or the discrete symmetries that you look in mathematics book.
But you could end up in other, like, where the symmetries are partial.
It does not complete each other.
Some dives into its own nonlinear channels.
But I think there are, like, what you are essentially saying, that there is something, like, in the essence of the first half of the meaning, and, which is going to match.
It's like the lizard tail.
It's in the form.
It's in the form.
So, if you want to quantify that, it has to come in a meaning that is symmetric.
Like, otherwise, it's random.
Lizard TA.
So, you have to choose what symmetry you want, what constrain you want to see the pattern to match.
You don't want this randomness, but which randomness you want.
But it's kind of like the temperature.
That randomness makes sense to you.
It might not make sense to someone else, but it makes sense to you that you are matching.
But if you were to complete this sentence, there would be an infinite number of...
Endings.
Beginnings.
Possibilities.
Endlessness.
Infinite number of endless...
Continuations.
Continuations.
Continuations.
Now, some of those things have the same meaning.
Why would you use endings, continuations, et cetera?
Right.
They're approximately the same sentence.
But why wouldn't you say letters or words?
I said endlessness.
See, that's the temperature setting, right?
I need more creativity.
I fell off from the logic.
Yeah.
So, yeah.
I wonder if it was Sol Wray Sol, though.
Yeah.
I just...
I had to bring it back to Sol Wray Sol, where we don't have...
Right?
Those sinsets are all one word.
Would it always have the same outcome?
Well, I'd love to see how this conversation would continue.
And hopefully, like the Penrose tiles, it would go on forever and never repeat.
Yeah.
Absolute pleasure.
Thank you so much for having me...
Look forward to speaking to you again.
...the impromptu interview.
But it's an absolute delight to be reunited with my old lab cult, so to speak.
That herbers new ways of thinking that has never been discussed before.
So, again, it was a journey.
We did not prepare.
We did not think what you're thinking about.
But we always try to find, end up with common ground.
So, it was a very delightful evening.
Pleasure.
Conversation theory.
Read it.
Thanks again.
We'll see you soon.
Thank you.
Thank you.
