Yeah, so it seems that truth is more robust than fiction.
I like this expression, truth is like a lion.
You don't need to defend it, just let it out of the cage.
And there's a lot of discussion now in the world about what's true
and this idea of getting into a post-truth reality.
But really, I think what it is is these kind of growing pains, if you will,
that we are in a phase transition.
For how knowledge is disseminated and how knowledge is contained.
And in that, we're bumping into the cage, right?
That's this growing pains that society is suddenly realizing
that they were on a farm, for lack of a better term.
And we never noticed, we never hit the electric fence with ideas.
And now we are.
And I think we need to have a better way of approaching these things.
And it's related to this idea we've been discussing about tolerating ambiguity.
And when we have these controversial ideas that arise on the Internet
and they're such heated discussions, and some people say, well, that's true.
And other people say, no, that's completely not true.
I think that we need to consider this sort of third viewpoint that we've all been lied to.
And that doesn't mean that there's somebody sitting there going, ha, ha, ha.
No, it's more complicated than that.
And that maybe reality is difficult to kind of percolate through the world.
So one of the metaphors I've been thinking about is like a bucket brigade.
And you have, when you do this old-fashioned, when you want to transport water,
and you have a whole bunch of people lined up and each have a bucket,
and you slosh one bucket to the next, and maybe you have to walk a couple feet with it,
so each person has to carry the bucket, that truth is like that,
or at least the way we think of the truth, we think of it in terms of consensus,
that what everybody agrees upon, that that's what reality is.
Now, imagine you have a four- or five-year-old in that bucket brigade,
and they can't carry very much.
How much water can you transport down the line?
Well, you're limited by how much water the four-year-old can carry,
in their leg of the gap.
Well, reality is like that.
We have a large distribution of people with vastly different experiences,
and educations, and backgrounds.
And we try to percolate reality across society.
And again, we think of the truth of it as the thing that spreads the farthest,
and the thing that everybody agrees upon,
that it's in all the books, and all the TV shows agree that that's truth.
But we forget that we're all limited,
and that not everybody can carry this bucket along, myself included.
And so maybe reality is just inherently more complicated
than you can pass along a chain of humans in the game Telephone.
And that by reasons of the nature of communication,
the truth doesn't make it to the other end.
And so when I say we're lied to,
it doesn't mean that there's a small number of individuals
that are trying to deceive a large number.
That might also happen.
But in general, I think just the nature of nature
is that it's very difficult to spread reality on a large scale.
You know, it also reminds me of a thing that we need to consider.
Again, this sort of third possibility, if you will.
When people talk about, let's just say, a conspiracy theory,
and there's more than a thousand, I'm sure.
And there's this notion that by definition,
any of these hotly debated topics is sort of patently false.
It's false by definition.
But that strikes me as inherently unscientific,
as very irrational.
That nothing is going to be that black or white.
We shouldn't, you know, ask ourselves,
why do people believe all these patently false ideas?
We should be asking ourselves,
of these thousand, which are correct?
Because if precisely zero of them are correct,
then that would be the greatest conspiracy of all time.
is the answer.
Is that the answer?
That's okay.
I hope they won't believe in the story.
I don't believe in that story.
I just want to say everything else.
I don't believe that I never believe in that story.
I had enough questions for ideas about myself,
but I've still got a question just because I'm clearly
and not about myself.
I've really Watford moved to cover
