Hi, my name is Jaylen Hayes, this is my teammate Adam, SanDip, and together we worked on epigenetic
strategies for delaying aging.
Our main approach is going to be prevention, if possible, or at least the delaying of age-related
issues.
So ultimately, what causes aging?
Some of the factors that we want to look at, and current research, preventative measures
that other people have taken in this field, go ahead, sources of aging, some stuff that
we can include is senescence, replicative stress, transcriptional stress, and epigenetic dysregulation,
which is going to be our focus, a little bit of explanation about senescence.
If you have a car and the parts wear down over time, you don't take care of it, it'll stop.
And maybe it stopped in your garage and it broke down.
And over time, these cars pile up in the parking garage and you start to run out of room.
It causes a lot of inflammation for the body, and over time, it will cause problems, because
you'll run out of room in the garage.
You got something?
Fantastic.
So we're going to focus on epigenetic dysfunction, primarily caused by epigenetic drift.
These things can be caused by enzyme degradation, errors copying the genome, environmental stressors,
but we're going to try to control for some of those in the clinical settings.
So, yeah.
Next slide.
So some methods that we have right now, since we want to be able to measure this.
Something from Oxford, Nanosphere Sequencing, it is an electrical method.
We also have the TAPS method and the SMART method.
When combined, they're more accurate, about 85 to 95 percent on average.
We'd like to get it closer, but that's what we have in order to measure our data.
So our strategy is going to be epigenetic reprogramming.
We are hoping to have the expression of the gene either more or less than what it is as we
age.
Some traits are expressed more, and that causes signs of aging, you know, wrinkles, and maybe
you start getting things like Alzheimer's, and we want to prevent some of those from
ever occurring.
So we want to moderate those genes in some type of way, and we hope to reprogram them.
We're going to use a CRISPR-D-Cas9.
It is currently being used in other epigenetic research.
Anyway, we hope to create an experimental design using this.
We are going to do a longitudinal mice study to analyze our data and get a little bit of
an idea.
There's not a major data set that we were able to access at the moment.
Can you pull it up?
It's okay.
Don't worry about it.
But we were hoping to use the mice study for epigenetic shift, and also from there, we were
going to analyze the epigenetic traits that contribute to age-related dysfunction.
We were hoping to move that data onto an organoid testing.
So organoid testing is basically organ on a chip.
We were going to then analyze that using machine learning analysis methods.
From there, we wanted to continue testing until we have more consistent data that we can
then use to develop epigenetic therapies to treat age-related dysfunction.
There was something that we did come across in our research that is slightly relevant, and
we didn't have as much time to focus on bioelectricity and the coordination.
However, Levin Lab at Tufts did go over this, and it is something that we want to look out
for in the future during our research.
And the biological differences that you are going to observe in your lifetime, things change.
Biological energy changes.
And we are hoping that maybe we are able to analyze it, and we are going to see if there's
a consequence of those biological alterations.
Some papers are suggesting that the consequence of biological alterations can change epigenetic
profiles rather than the other way around.
And this is just a little bit more about that that we were working on as we were trying to
understand the relationship, whether it's causational or correlational between epigenetic makeup and
profile, as well as in relation to bioelectricity in the body and how that changes through life.
Thank you very much.
That was our presentation, and this is our key takeaway.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So, I'll do the questions.
Yeah.
Here's the question guy.
Do you project that this is certainly that you can provide to customers, or this is IP that
you would like to license to industry?
So, when do you see this one?
Yes, this could, sorry.
I'll take both now.
Yes, this could absolutely be a product.
The end product of this would be, okay, we perform our entire analysis.
We determine these specific genes that are being modified through epigenetic modifications
that tend to pop up during old age, and these are the ones that are causing the greatest
cellular phenotype changes.
So, let's say, cytoskeleton dysregulation, issues with the mitochondria, extra-inflammatory
cytokines and whatnot being produced by cells.
So, we would create a gene therapy, which are very well-known, established gene therapies,
and we would target through specifically a small subset of these genes and try to restore
the original epigenomic functions of them, whether it's remethylating, demethylating them
and whatnot.
So, there's a clear path to an administrative view.
Thank you.
Originally, you guys were BioGuys, so the group name?
Yes.
Sorry about that.
No, no, no.
That's okay.
That's okay.
We want to make sure.
Thank you.
Thank you guys.
Very good.
Appreciate it.
Thank you so much.
