Give it up for David Barzalot.
Hi, so my name is David Barzalot.
I am a physician, founder and CEO of Healthspan Coaching, LLC, and essentially I'm a longevity
physician and longevity consultant.
I wasn't expecting to do a presentation, but the last one touched upon something that's
really important.
I was like, why don't I just show these guys for like one minute, one slide, but just to
bring things into context.
A lot of you here understand the basics or in-depth machine learning and training, but
I come from an evidence-based precision medicine, both the science, the geroscience, the aging
biology, and things like lifestyle medicine and the cutting edge.
So in the last presentation, they were talking about things that they were training on, these
pathways and so forth.
This actually, you know, there's a more updated version, like 12 hallmarks instead of 9, same
set of authors in 2023, but there's a concept you should understand called the hallmarks of
aging.
So anyone out here, Google hallmarks of aging, read about it.
Lopez Oten has a fantastic publication.
The concept is, what is a hallmark of aging?
In the past, aging biology was a descriptive field.
People get old, here's what happens, oh, we've got lipofusion, okay, these worms, they're equivalent
of our pharynxism working and they starve.
The hallmarks of aging was part of the revolution after genetics where we found one single mutant
mutation in a single gene in C. algans, a worm, doubled its lifespan.
After that, they're asked, if one gene can do so much, maybe we can address this biology
of aging thing.
It's not too complicated with 10,000 plus genes, all interacting in this network, we'll never
figure out.
One gene.
So then what was the next step?
We said, well, what's the pathway behind the gene?
So the concept of hallmarks of aging, it's not the end all, it's a work in progress, they're
not perfect, but it's the idea.
So I think it's a hallmark of aging, one, it correlates with aging, biologic aging in
particular, generally chronologic aging.
Two, if you make the hallmark worse, it ages faster, most important, if you mitigate, you
alleviate the hallmark of aging, the organism through functional markers, biochemical markers,
they behave, look, their phenotype is younger.
So that's what a hallmark of aging is.
So as we're training these models, we don't have these lifetime randomized controlled trials
of human beings at birth, put on a medication, follow them for life, 30, 40, 50 plus years,
see what happens.
That's not going to happen.
Ethics, finances, everything else.
So one of the hardest things about aging biology is how do we prove something works?
So one thing we're trying to do is we're trying to have these validated measures, things related
to the hallmarks of aging, epigenetic and other omic clocks, that's the next step.
So if you can contribute, not just to finding things, but asking something, how do we measure
there's change?
So if we have a discovery for aging biology, we can actually test, does it work in humans?
That's my story.
I hope you, this inspires some of you to look into aging biology.
Any questions for David?
One.
One.
Who thinks they have the best question?
Best question.
Oh.
Do you see a relationship between epigenetic dogs and no one another?
There was actually a very recent publication, something I do, aging doc on X.
If you're on X or Twitter, my 30,000 followers are very concentrated in aging biology, longevity,
investing in aging biotech.
So I post regularly publications, and there was actually a recent study along these lines.
And yes, some aging models are conceptually increasing entropy, and secondly, there's recent
data along those lines in a model.
Great question.
Yeah, my presentation's in a moment.
Okay.
I'm looking forward to it.
Thank you.
All right.
So we just get started.
