So, with this idea of agriculture, something I've been thinking about, I remember having this idea when I was probably 18 or 19, and I remembered something that my father had said about things like bananas as sort of ideal, sort of perfect, because the trash, the banana peel, just makes more soil.
It's this fantastic loop that nature's created, where it can recycle the output to become a new input, and it got me thinking about the lines of reprogramming biology, and this is one of my fascinating, one of the ideas that's really fascinated me for decades, kind of a pet project that I thought might take, you know, more than my lifetime for it to be realized, but now with the breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, I actually think we might be,
a decade or two away from reprogramming things like a banana, and I remember having the idea that there's no reason that we can't peel open a banana and essentially find meat inside, you know, beef tenderloin, whatever it might be.
Now, obviously, there's the energetics of it, you'd have to have a massive array of leaf, essentially, collecting the photo energy to be able to support that production.
A cow consumes a large amount of grass to do this, but there's a lot of things about the cow that, as a carnivore, I'm not really interested in, and it could be, you know, I could be mistaken,
and it could be that the cows are an optimal way of producing beef, but the idea was that if we could recode the genetics and kind of merge the plant and animal kingdom,
that we could create an actual eggplant, right, a thing where you could pluck eggs out of it, or a tree that actually produced milk the way a latex tree produces sap, and so on.
And I remember seeing this picture of the maple forest, where they get the maple sap, and they kind of tap it, and on some of those maple tree farms,
what they do is they have, like, plumbing that will actually kind of collect the sap, and I remember thinking, what if we kind of programmed the maple trees to connect at the root level?
Could we create a whole living forest, kind of this large organism, and get maybe multiple different plant species all working together in the forest to kind of become a real food factory,
where maybe you just tap sugars out at one end, that would certainly be simple enough to do, wouldn't require a lot of reprogramming the biology,
and have all the roots come together in a central location, and you just open some kind of spigot or tap into it with a small nick in the bark,
and then all of the sap from an entire forest would come to one collection point.
I think that's going to be very possible.
I don't see any reason in physics why we won't be able to do something like that.
And then another version of that idea that I really like is the idea that if we take an acorn, and we plant an acorn,
that it has the recipe, the morphogenesis for how to create an oak tree, but nature supports very complex shapes, right?
We're a very complicated shape, and so if we can get an oak tree to go up,
why don't we have it go up, over, and connect as a roof, and make a house?
We could put greenery on it on the roof or tiles, and it could collect energy like the forest and the syrup,
or it could just be a better way of creating a log cabin.
So I imagine that in a few decades, that's something we're going to be able to do.
Reverse engineer the acorn and have it create the kind of scaffolding and infrastructure we see in a log cabin.
Thank you.
