Hi there. I'm Samaya Opal. I'm a first-year medical student at Boston University, Giovanni
and the United Nations School of Medicine. Just a little bit about my background. I'm
in a couple of labs. I'm in a neurodegeneration lab at the VA clinic, the Jamaica Plains location,
where I do database consolidation, run EUGs, that kind of thing, interrupt patients. And
I'm also in a religious cognition lab, which is more fun and experimental. So with these
two kind of background, I'm going to talk to you about this idea that I have that dissociation
isn't inherently pathological to cognition. We don't see the screen. Oh no, there's no
screen. It's just me. I'm the screen. And it may be correlative to variables of creativity.
So dissociation is one of those phenomenological features that I can describe to you the best
that I've experienced, but I can't really go into your brain and test it on a quantifiable
measure, usually anyway. In psychology and whatnot, though, it is one of those factors
that we ask often, for DID, for schizophrenia. It's related to a lot of symptomatic features,
but we don't have a good way of trying to figure out what it actually is. So I'm trying to posit
one way of thinking about it. So dissociation is a way of describing it is that it is a loss
of autonomy. If you're losing autonomy with your senses, if you're losing autonomy with
your body, in some way, my spatial recognition of myself is detached from reality. Yep. So
I'd like to also use dream cognition as a way of talking about how this might be related
to creativity in the mind. By examining the way that dissociation restructures our capacity
for simulations in that we're able to run models in a new sense, we can see that in dream cognition
with supernatural breakages. So I currently am coding like thousands of dreams for physical
law breaks and whatnot. And that's similar to like hallucinations, similar to hallucinations
of Parkinson's and schizophrenia and whatnot. And that basically posits that your external
simulation in the dream is offering something that wouldn't normally happen in the real world
would like to say, right? So we're looking for a highly dissociative individuals, therefore
have higher rates of those cognitive breaks and whatnot. And this actually relates to Augusta's
earlier presentation where he talked about transformation drive. And this is how I kind of relate this
to AI and whatnot and how we think about cognition as a whole. Because maximizing novel configurations
is one of the most important steps for cognitive growth of any of these organizational systems,
of any organizational matter, the evolution, the genomics, everything we've been talking
about throughout these many conversations and whatnot. So as a medical student though, and as someone
very pragmatic about my physical sense, I also do feel that there is something to making sure to
consider the pathology and the ways it can go wrong. So I guess I'm bringing this up as a discussion
because maybe AI can be trained more on these law breaks, on these kinds of more experimental
informations, which may in turn increase hallucinations and whatnot, which may in turn increase other
symptomatic things similar we see in ourselves, but it could also increase simulations which result in
the states that we often quantify or we subjectively call ecstasy flow and yeah, trans states and whatnot. So
yeah, that's what I wanted to say about that. I have a lot more other words and whatnot,
but I'd rather hear questions or hear thoughts. Since she was quick, can we give her a few more
options for audience questions? Yes. Audience questions. If you guys have any. Yeah. How would
you like to see this as someone studying medicine implemented on a clinical scale when we have models trained
on these things? I guess implementation I'd want to think a lot more about because that's where you
actually have a lot more consequences, ramifications and whatnot. But in terms of implementation of how
I treat my patients, how I talk to people, how I engage with consciousness as a whole, understanding
that these outlier factors may actually be a sign of a new type of intelligence and being more open to
them as like everyone in this room talking with you guys, I've seen like such interesting outliers and
types of intelligence. So dissociation or that ability to reframe how we normally conceptualize
the world or split it in a way might actually make the way to do that. I'm thinking they might be helpful
diagnostically as well as just integrating as you alluded to our neurodiversity. The AMI might be
on a larger, large enough database that it could make inferences about capabilities that we, that's
harder for us to identify around the particular flavor of neurodiversity. Yeah, I agree with that. If
you talk to chat GPT, Claude AI, if you talk to it about neurodiversity, it is very interesting,
especially if you try to include it in the conversation, because that's how I try to get it
to justify certain things about itself. I'm like, well, but isn't that like if you were experiencing with
a less empathy or if you cognitively had certain parts of the brains that were mapped differently,
like we can see. So anyway, I agree with that. Anything else? Yeah. Okay. So you mentioned how
dissociation can be like pathological and also how it can be very helpful and with drive creativity and
growth. So have you seen any, um, um, like how, uh, is there, is there anything you can think of
to go from one to the other? Yes, I do. I do see those. And that's what we talked
about yesterday with that block actually about the, um, synesthesia about certain types of autism,
maybe being neural networks layered on top of one another and having connections form in the short
term. So like what I brought up yesterday during the conversation was that stimming and dancing,
there are similarities there about this type of movement. We feel these certain like, uh,
physiological sensors, which feel kind to people across the spectrum of intelligences and diverse
neurodiversity. So I do think that there are things like scent incense, you know, that's across
cultures. I'm also like into anthropology. So that influences a lot of the way I look at the world,
but you look across cultures, you see rhythmic dance, you see, um, sense colors. Uh, yeah. So
I do think there are correlates and we naturally are trying to figure this out. The cognitive
attractors, I think they're sometimes called. All right. Well, one last, Kurt, you mentioned you
were a part of a religious lab, something like that. What's the relationship between that and
dissociation? Yeah. So the religious cognition lab I'm in, uh, that's actually one of the guys who
invited me here. He's supposed to speak the other day. Luca Del Dio, uh, he and I worked there and
we code and we would interview patients about their conceptions of existential abstracts because I am
a Lugan Medicine student. So it's very much like trying to turn it into non, um, stigmatized terminology
and whatnot. Theists, atheists, anyone can interact with the lab. But, uh, it relates because we do a lot
of dream data. We do EEGs on the people and whatnot. And then we look through the symbols and whatnot and we
have all of their, we have interviews about their turning points in their life. And then we try to
find kind of correlates like, oh, you're, this is traumatic stuff that has happened in your past.
We see these happening in your dreams. Obviously it's like really experimental and whatnot and how
you're making sure to do it, but not do it in like a Freudian way or something. So, um, but it's very
fascinating place to be. What else? Uh, it's called the cognitive neuroscience of religious cognition lab.
What? Uh, national university, I think it is. McNamara is the PI and he's at
Boston university school of medicine. So that's how I got to know him, but yeah.
Um, what's the opposite of dissociation? Is it being present and is there, if being, if there's
something positive about being dissociative, is there something negative about being too present?
No, that's so true. I think you can be too present. That's like overstimulation, right?
When I'm in a room and I feel all these noises and I'm like, wait, I cannot even find a place of peace.
Yeah. So, um, I, I don't want to like make one seem more negative and one more positive. I think
they're very systematic and there is something that I'd like to call a narrative intelligence,
where people are able to utilize those skills. Do I want to be close to the situation? Do I want to
be away? Yeah. And I think doctors especially use that. Just one last point. I would love to study
physicians minds, especially like an ER doctor versus like a pathologist versus a sleep medicine
specialty. They're very interesting. Yeah. You're talking about the two different states and switching
between the question about any research on how to do that. Hmm. I wouldn't say this like hardcore
research, nothing that I've personally found, but I think anecdotally you can find. And again,
in anthropology or cultural sociology, you can find more evidence of how different cultures have
utilized this. But personally, I don't know a great like meta analysis I would suggest. Yeah.
Um, you need to be interested in taking a look at the predictive process, like if you have it.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. And this concept of narrative shifts reminds me of precision reading too,
and being able to, um, apply that precision. I'd love to talk after about that. That sounds great.
