Thank you for a very kind introduction. Hopefully you can see my screen.
Yes. Okay, fine. So I'm just going to cover a couple of areas in age-related
disease research at FAU. You know, obviously we have a lot of really exciting work going on here,
but I'll just highlight two things and hopefully you'll find these interesting. So
one thing I want to discuss is our Cancer Center of Excellence. So this was a designation by the
Florida legislature. These started in 2013 and it's really based on that combination of having
very rigorous research and training as well as patient coordinated care. So this spans everything
from basic research through translational research and then also clinical research.
When this program started, there were four Cancer Centers of Excellence, Moffitt, Mayo,
Miami Sylvester, and then University of Florida Shands. We joined in 2021. It's a collaboration
between Memorial Cancer Institute and Florida Atlantic University. And then in 2023, Cleveland
Clinic became the sixth Cancer Center of Excellence in the state. We have about 200 members in our
Cancer Center of Excellence. And you can see it spans a number of institutions as well as hospitals.
But one of the things that we're particularly excited about research-wise is we started to
develop what we call a biobank, a cancer biospecimen repository. So the way it works is that when a
patient has surgery, normally when cancerous tissue is removed, a small amount of it is used
to pathology, but most of it is thrown away. In the case of a biobank, you're storing these materials
for eventual use in different contexts. We started this biobank in 2022. It originally was with breast
cancer patients. Our initial clinical trial was 50 patients, which we reached pretty quickly. And as you
can see, we were able to store, you know, besides tissue, we're storing plasma and serum so that we
can test the next generation sequencing, try to understand differences in responses to various
treatments. But where we're really going with this is the creation of what's called organoids.
So organoids are three-dimensional models of tumors. One of the difficulties in doing cancer research
is really developing models that look like the way tumors grow in the body. Typically,
we've used things like just cell culture. Even, you know, there are things about animal models that
don't really translate well to the condition in people. So organoids are, you're essentially taking
a tumor and you're regrowing it. And that includes the cancer as well as the cells that surround it.
And this is a three-dimensional structure. And then you can really study in much greater detail,
first of all, how a tumor may grow, but also whether a therapeutic agent can be effective or
not. Is it going to be able to penetrate into the tumor? And how well does it work when it's in a state
that looks much more like tumors in the body look? So this just shows really the difference between
two-dimensional and three-dimensional cell culture. Two-dimensional is usually used when you
want to grow cells, but it's not really great if you want to test things like therapeutic agents because
you're having all the cells under virtually the same conditions where you can see in the 3D cultural
model, culture model, you know, this, the core of the tumor is very different than the outside.
And this is why drugs can often fail because they can penetrate the outside of the tumor,
but don't really get to that core. The other problem is that the core has very different
physiological behaviors. It can have very low oxygen. It can have very low nutrient
supply, and that can affect whether a therapeutic agent will be effective or not.
So there are ways to, you know, initiate these spheroids and organoids when you want to grow them,
and that's what's really shown on the right here. We use collagen to create these three-dimensional
structures, and then the tumor cells and the surrounding cells will start to grow on it.
We can look at these in a number of different ways. So these are some tumor spheroids and
looking at their ability to invade. So if you look at it in just a flat representation on the left,
you can see from the central spheroid how much this has grown out. You can see everything kind of
sticking out from it. You can see these things growing in all different directions. On the right,
this is actually one of my favorite images we ever captured because I think it really demonstrates just
the way tumors can invade. You can see this one branch just sticking way out. You know,
they can just be very aggressive, and I think this captures the aggressive nature very well.
Now there's a little bit of a problem though when you try to study therapeutic agents because these
things are growing in three dimensions. And as you can imagine, trying to monitor in three dimensions
can get very tricky. So we had actually published a method just a couple years ago. We called this this
hit-pick analysis where we're looking at these tumoroids growing in three dimensions. We can create
masks around them and do the data processing in a very quick and easy fashion. You can see on the
bottom, you know, we basically wiped out about 17 minutes of imaging time by doing this method and
obviously quite a bit of data storage space. If you're going to want to analyze a variety of compounds and
look at how their effect against tumors really work, you want to be able to analyze them in a very quick
process but also have it be very rigorous. And this hit-pick process actually works pretty well.
So what are the type of things people are developing at FAU that we can look at potentially unique
agents against tumors? So up at Harbor Branch, they have access to compounds that really nobody else in
the world does. So we refer to these as drugs from the sea, and these are different unique species
that exist out off the coast of Florida. And over the years up at Harbor Branch, they've been able to
mine these different species and really look and see what type of unique compounds are present.
And I've shown just a few things on the left. They look at a number of different diseases,
but one of the ones that they isolated is being looked at in triple negative breast cancer. Another
compound they have is really working well against pancreatic cancer. So, you know, and again, these are
these are new agents that give new hope in looking at, you know, how to treat cancer, new cancer
therapeutic agents, and so on. Again, I think many people are aware of the fact that you can have a
very effective agent against cancer, but then there can be tolerance to it after a while. So you actually
really would prefer to have sort of a small army of agents, right? You can use one once another one
becomes a little bit ineffective. So this is, I think, very exciting work and again, really unique
to the researchers at FAU. The second area I just want to talk about briefly is Alzheimer's disease
and areas where and things we're doing along those lines. Now, again, I don't know if I need to tell
people this. Alzheimer's disease is a pretty big deal in Florida. We have the second highest number
of seniors living with Alzheimer's in the nation. This is a disease that is one of aging and one that
certainly is going to become more and more prevalent over time as our population ages.
So what happens in Alzheimer's over time, if you look at the brain, basically you have a brain that
starts to shrink, okay? It decreases in size. You start to have these large gaps open up spaces in the
brain and that's due to quite a bit of neuronal death. So you have cells dying and you have the brain
starting to shrink. So one of the pathologies that's been noticed in Alzheimer's disease
is a production of what's called beta amyloid. So our bodies normally produce from amyloid precursor
protein, a fragment that's referred to as beta amyloid. Now, under normal circumstances,
beta amyloid is used in the body. It has a number of important physiological functions,
but we remove it from the brain pretty efficiently. Well, what happens in Alzheimer's disease is that
removal process is somehow dampened and you end up with an aggregation of these beta amyloid molecules
in the brain. These start to form these plaques and the plaques are responsible for neuronal death.
And that's shown in this figure here. Now, in more recent years, there's been drugs that have been
approved to actually treat this process. What they do is they interact with either the plaque or
earlier forms of it and break it up and move it out of the brain. So something like aducanumab,
that was the first drug approved for this process. More recently, lukanumab is being used.
So lukanumab is a little bit better. So these are interesting therapeutic agents developed to treat
Alzheimer's disease, but they have a very, very big drawback. And in this table, you can just take a look
at the row that says brain penetration, ability to cross blood-brain barrier. So this is when you
take a drug, how well does it get into the brain where it needs to work? And you can see for aducanumab,
we're talking about 1.5% of the drug actually gets in the brain. Something like lukanumab is even worse,
0.3%. So, you know, this is really a problem, right? You're, first of all, dosing patients with
a very large amount of drug because you're just trying to get something into the brain. Very
inefficient, definitely creates quite a bit of side reaction. So what we are thinking about is, well,
can you improve delivery of these drugs to the brain? And indeed, we're part of a clinical trial.
This is one that is overseen by FAU and is done in collaboration with Delray Medical Center,
using a technology called Focused Ultrasound. So what Focused Ultrasound does is it delivers ultrasound
to select regions of the brain. There are these small micro bubbles that are circulating that are
injected into the patient. And those micro bubbles start to bounce around and they disrupt the blood
brain barrier. And that allows the drug to get into the brain much more efficiently. So one of the
really dramatic examples of how well this technology can work is shown in the figure on the lower right.
And I hope people can see my pointer. This is a patient who has Alzheimer's disease and the hallmark
of the beta amyloid aggregates is shown in red. That's all beta amyloid aggregation in the brain.
Now this patient was treated with aducanumab and part of their brain was treated
with Focused Ultrasound. And that's where the outline is here. So this patient is really their
own control. The drug is circulating. The Focused Ultrasound is here. So we can compare this side
of the brain to this side to see how well Focused Ultrasound helps the drug do its thing.
26 weeks later, if we look at the patient, you can see the dramatic difference. Where the Focused Ultrasound
was about 80% of the beta amyloid has been removed. Where it wasn't, maybe about 10%.
So this really makes the case for how well this technology can be utilized in applying it not only
for Alzheimer's patients, but you can imagine for a number of different brain disorders. Now, a big
drawback right now is that when the patient is treated with Focused Ultrasound, they also have to be
in an MRI because this is how you monitor what's going on in the brain. Well, most hospitals don't
have a lot of free time on their MRI. So you're left with, you know, how many patients they can actually
treat. So here at FAU, we're actually building what we're calling the NeuroInnovate Research and
Training Center. So we actually have our own MRI. Our MRI center started about two months ago.
We're in the process of bringing in our focused ultrasound unit so we can start to do research and
also treat patients here at FAU. We're not going to be time limited because our MRI is not tied up
with normal patient usage as it is at a hospital. We're also in the process of setting up a preclinical
focused ultrasound center, which would involve, again, having the animal focused ultrasound as well
as an animal MRI. So we're particularly excited about this. If we can bring all these pieces
together, we will certainly be the only center like this in the country, probably one of three
in the world. I just do need to point out the initial clinical trial we're engaged in and how
that was supported. Then just the very last thing I want to mention is we found out that if we can get
the center up and running, we will be eligible for a number of clinical trials here. And you can just
think about the different brain disorders we can potentially treat, different addiction disorders,
obviously a number of different brain cancers, certainly glioblastoma, ALS, other options for
Alzheimer's disease and so on. And right now we have a number of research agreements with our local
hospitals because they would ultimately like to have their patients come to the center. Delray,
who we've been working with for a while, the West Palm Beach VA Hospital, Memorial Health Care System,
as well as Broward Health Medical Center. And with that, that's really just sums up a couple of areas
I wanted to discuss in terms of some of the research going on here at FAU that involves these age-related
diseases. Oh, okay. Thank you, Dr. Phil. So I have one question. So what do you suggest
the most important problem that they could work on in the aging field? So maybe your advice for this
big group here? There are about 60 students here. Right. So really, I mean, right now the big issue in
aging-related diseases are neurodegenerative diseases. This is going to be, I mean, besides the fact that
they are difficult to treat, and we're going to see more and more of this come up simply because the population is
aging. It creates, you know, obviously for a patient, it's extremely difficult. You know,
you can live a long time even once these diseases start clinically. You also have caregivers and
how difficult it is for them. Obviously, financially, this is a tremendous strain. So, you know, this is
really going to be a bigger and bigger issue, especially, I would say, over the next 10 to 15 years.
We would love to see more opportunities to deal with these diseases. Now, when I talk about
treatment though, not all of it should be once you have the disease. We're learning more and more about
things you can do that can limit your potential to get the disease or shift the time frame of it,
where instead of 60, maybe at 80. This makes a big difference. So to me, this is the area that
needs the most investment at this point in time. Thank you. Thank you so much, Dr. James.
Thank you. You're very welcome.
By any chance, are you available to speak as a mentor
or later on during the event? Oops, actually, sorry. And no, I'm actually, I'm going to be
signing off here after the next talk. I'm sorry. No, I won't be around after that point.
Well, thank you. But I'm certainly, you know, if there are those who, you know, after this event,
would like to talk further, I'm certainly available, more than happy to. That would be
fine. I think I, did I see a hand up? I'm sorry. I put the one in the corner, but.
There's a hand right there. Oh, okay.
Hi, just a really quick question. Is there any other uses for that technology with the bubbles
being able to, I know it's not the blood-brain barrier, but like for other uses of that technology
to get certain medications to targeted spots? Yes. I mean, are you referring to the fact that actually
using the bubbles to deliver drugs? Yeah. Okay. So, yeah, so that's, you know,
that's a really interesting application too, because that whole field is really in its infancy
in terms of the sort of size you can work with and how you can best deliver things. Over time,
I could certainly see applications where you can, you're going to be delivering drugs through that
mechanism, not just having the drug circulate on its own. Absolutely. All right. Sorry,
I have one more question. All right. One more question. By any chance, are you familiar with the
GLANCE platform for 3D organoid formation? I'm sorry, which platform for organoid formation?
96-well GLANCE. So, I'm not sure about GLANCE. We, there are a couple of organoid formation
technologies that we use in the lab. That didn't sound familiar though. Can you give me a little
more background? Kind of like, what is, how does it, what does it utilize to do the 3D or, uh, growth?
Um, it's, it's a research paper that was recently published talking about the, um, difficulties with
gel domes and plugs for, uh, 3D, um, because they're not flat. So, what they did is they used mean gray
value and, um, with, with fluorescent probes and using, uh, an algorithm to test for, um, cellular function
and viability. And they also co-cultured with cap cells to CECM. Yep. But it's, it's very interesting.
It's similar to what is being done at FAU. So, I wanted to know. Right. Okay. So, yeah, let me expand
upon that a little bit. Because, you know, the diagram that I showed is pretty simple, right? In
terms of, you know, you, you, you add some collagen, you let this grow, you can do a hanging droplet method
and you end up with, with these 3D cultures. In real life, yes, it is more complicated than that.
These things need, first of all, the shape of the environment they're in is very important.
And one of the considerations is that you start with something that may be biodegradable.
So, um, the, the, um, the tumor cells themselves kind of model their own environment around it. Okay.
That's one consideration in this. The other is whether you need certain growth factors and whether
those growth factors need to be just added or whether they need to be sort of segregated away.
And then again, the tumor accesses it over time. Um, yeah, there, there's a lot of considerations
in trying to produce really good organoids. And also if you're, it depends on which cancer you're
trying to, uh, model too. Okay. The environment around brain cancer is very different. The environment
around pancreatic cancer. So there, yeah, there's quite a number of considerations, but again, this is an
area that there's been quite a lot of research in, in our case, let me, let me, I'm sorry, going on a
little bit about this, but in dealing with Memorial, the main cancers that we are seeing that are coming
into our biobank, our breast cancer, lung cancer, and pancreatic cancer. So we're, we would be focusing
on systems that more closely model those three cancers. Thank you, Dr. Fields. We appreciate
that. Awesome. All right. Give it up one more time for Dr. Fields. Thank you. All right. Our next guest.
