Yeah, I'm Safal. I study math and philosophy at Tufts, and I previously worked for the Levin Lab for some time.
I'm Tyler, and I study the philosophy of sentience.
I'm Michael Osbroff. I study general relativity and complex systems, and I'm developing a theory of dimensional collapsars.
My name is Daniel Van Zandt. I'm a fenced sitter between computational neuroscience and machine learning.
I should have said my last name.
I would just say, speak a little louder, and try not to make noises around the lights on the box.
Oh, yeah, at least stop crinkling my bottle next to the mic.
Yeah, just speak louder like you were in there, and keep an answer like that, and we'll be good. Let's start.
Well, I think we talked about talking about theistic evolution, so let's, we did a round of introductions.
Let's do a round of introductions with our relationship to that topic, and then we can get into the deeper discussion.
Yeah, that's good.
Yeah. So we can go the same way around.
Yeah, so I'm a Hindu. I was raised Hindu. I take ideas from Hinduism fairly seriously.
As far as evolutionary ideas go, I've been influenced a lot by Daniel Dennett's reading in Darwin's Dangerous Idea.
I consider that one of the best books I've read, despite disagreeing with many of the finer points of Dennett's philosophy.
And I'm, like, somewhat preoccupied about, you know, questions of selection and also related questions in genetics around heritability,
although I must say I'm quite an amateur in genetics and evolutionary theory in general.
I don't know much about it.
And, you know, I do have a background in mathematical logic, which has some relations to game theory,
so I kind of hope to study game theory, specifically evolutionary game theory, to break into this field a little more.
But I do enjoy casual discussions on the topic.
I was raised secular and would have described myself as an atheist until I was about 24.
And I was, I do, I have a history studying zoology and ecology and biology.
I've spent a lot of time in the field with zoologists and it's always been a passion.
And then I started studying sentience and, you know, how it would relate to technology as well as my own mind and my mental processes.
And it led me to theism when I was a lot later in life and, say, I could just say I studied Judaism.
So I grew up in a fairly secular but Jewish household.
And, like, in my, like, teens, I ended up becoming an atheist.
But after researching general relativity for, like, a fair bit and delving deep into the Lovecraftian aspects of it,
I'm really certain that there's, like, a bunch of, like, eldritch horrors out there.
So, like, yeah, that's my belief system now.
Excellent.
My name is Daniel Van Zandt.
I was an atheist until I was about 18.
And then I slowly became where I am now, which I would consider myself a devout Protestant Christian.
And when I transitioned for a long time, I did it without really support from, like, a larger body of people who believe the same way I do.
So I just sort of read the Bible and figured out the things I could figure out about it.
And because of that, I wasn't even aware that there was a conflict viewed between sort of evolution and theism until further down the line.
I was, like, always like, oh, of course, yeah, both of these things are true.
And so, and I still hold that both of these things are true.
So that's kind of where I come at evolutionary theism from.
I took what I believe to be closer to a first principles approach, or at least, like, solely scripture approach to my religion.
And I didn't find anything against evolution by doing things that way.
That's the way I'll put it.
I had a very similar experience.
You know, I went through that transition alone.
And at least, like, not with the community of theists around me.
And so it came mostly from just starting to see patterns in religious texts, in theistic tradition, and the value in theistic tradition that was not incompatible with my study of the natural world.
It seems there's an important emphasis that all of us have on reading the texts as a source of, you know, moral or metaphysical guidance.
But on the other hand, there are movements where, for instance, you know, you take the text literally, and it's these literalist movements that often lead to readings that are against evolutionary theory or findings from the natural sciences.
Because what would you guys say is your relationship to theological literalism?
How would you say you conduct the proper exegesis or hermeneutics for your religious text readings?
What's interesting is one of the things that I remember when I was 13 years old and I was getting bar mitzvahed, my rabbi asked me, you know, what do you think about God?
And I was like, I don't believe in God.
And he was like, why not?
And I said, because the Bible says that, you know, God created the world in six days, essentially.
And I know that Earth is much older than that.
And he said, well, what if the one day for God is different than one day for us?
And I thought that was a ridiculous, you know, idea and didn't really come back to it till later.
But what was interesting is that as I started to study myself much later in life, Hebrew word for day that's used is Yom in the original Bible and the Torah.
And Yom just means period.
It means a period of some sort.
And it's like, you know, I'm there that's I think that it's sometimes important to start to look at, you know, the actual text itself and not just the text, but its translation, how it's been translated.
So I'm I think that I agree with everything you just said.
I think where I come at it is there's this awesome essay by C.S. Lewis called Myth Become Fact.
And he talks about the Bible as something coming into focus.
And by coming into focus, he means going from the mythic to the literal over the course of it.
And so his idea is that, like, everything about Jesus is very literal.
And then there's things in John about Jesus, you know, being the word embodied in reality.
And so he believes in the literal death and literal, you know, Jesus walked out of the cave after he died, these types of things.
But he thinks the early stuff is a myth.
And that doesn't make it less true in some sense.
It just means it's true in a different way.
And in some sense, myths have the ability to be a deeper truth than stories that are just about reality does.
So it is something interesting is I remember when I first started, like, investigating scripture, I saw that some people were saying, oh, it's it's it's metaphorically true.
And then some people were saying that it was historically true.
And what's interesting is that I heard somebody say that the Bible or the Torah is which is the first five books of the Bible is not the story of what happened alone.
It's the story of what happens.
It's a that really resonated with me.
And I kind of started to say, like, scripture, what defines scripture as it makes it different from just another book is that it is it's like super literally true.
It is historically true.
It's mythically true.
It's it's predictably true.
It's morally true.
It's like all of these true on all these different levels at once.
This this comes by in Hinduism, too, where we have layers of scriptures.
So at the base of the religion, we have what's what are called the Vedic scriptures.
And essentially these contain the ritual and metaphysical core of the religion.
So at the oldest layer, we have the Vedic rituals.
And we have the Brahmarnas and Upanishads and Araniyakas, which are written as commentaries.
And by commentaries, I really mean interpretations of these rituals.
Right.
So, for instance, in the Vedas, there is a ritual called Ashwamedha or the horse sacrifice.
And essentially the way this ritual works is a king releases a horse upon territory.
And wherever the horse roams is, you know, essentially the king marks this as his territory.
And there is varying interpretations as to how it's stopped.
But essentially, once the horse's march concludes, the horse is then sacrificed and its meat is cooked and eaten in the court.
Now, this sounds all this all sounds rather, you know, sort of cruel.
But the opening act of the Brihadaranyaku Upanishad situates this in a broader context.
First, the symbolic significance of this ritual is there is essentially a mapping from each part of the horse to each part of the cosmos.
And when you when when the Rishis ate the flesh of the horse, they're essentially communing with those aspects of the cosmos and internalizing them.
And there is a sense in which the horse becomes a part of them.
But by eating the horse, they're also internalizing that they are in the horse and that they are in the particular part of the universe.
And they're affirming their speech, sight and all that.
Obviously, Hindus today don't eat the horses.
Most, you know, have dietary restrictions and vegetarianism is generally seen as aspirational.
But, you know, you have that ritual layer, which might seem parochial and almost archaic, you know, like people often don't know why you follow these laws.
And then you have a layer of metaphysical interpretation, which imputes a worldview onto these rituals and makes them worth believing.
And then you have the third layer, the Purans and Itihases, which sort of recount historical events, historical events.
They're really mytho-historical, like you guys pointed out.
But it doesn't matter so much whether they literally happened as they said they did.
Of course, for certain cases in Christianity, for instance, it's quite important theologically that the resurrection happened.
But points aside, if you look at old stories from, say, Genesis and Exodus, it's more the general principles for what's being set up.
So I feel once you stratify religious doctrine into these roles, ritual, metaphysical, mytho-historical, and doctrinal historical,
which is really, you know, the concrete historical points that are important, you can start to broader, more broadly understand the significance of some of these traditions.
And I think it's worth bringing up, these distinctions aren't something I feel like I'm making up when I'm putting them there.
Yeah, exactly.
It was somewhat of a surprise to me that there's Christians that take Genesis 1 and 2 extremely literally because they read very, very differently to me than, like, the Gospels.
Like, the Gospels of the stories of Jesus read, like, historical accounts in the style that they're written.
Exactly.
It's very different.
It's a very different writing style.
And there's some good—I'm not a Hebrew expert, but there's some good—or a Greek expert, but there's some good evidence that, like, there's indicators of the writing style there.
And it would have been even more clear if I was reading them in their original ancient languages that they were in different writing styles.
It's interesting, too, is, like, there's lots of, like, contextual things that make things sound much more abstract than they probably would have if you were reading them back when these things were—closer to when these things were written.
And so, like, one of the things that I found interesting is that when you're reading—I think it's in the Quran, there's a part of the Quran where it's talking about—or at least Muhammad was attributed to saying that in the future we will crawl into something like we'll crawl into the belly of donkeys, we'll fly above the clouds with their ears stretched out, and they will be powered by fire.
And it's, like, that sounds like a crazy statement, but then when you realize that, like, donkeys were the transportation at the time, before we had airplanes, we used to say one day there will be flying cars.
But, like, if there was no cars yet, then what you would say is, like, one day there will be flying donkeys that are powered by fire and will, like, you know, fly above the clouds.
And it's, like, how many things in Scripture are due to—seem so nonsensical because we are lacking the context that was there when it was written.
Now you hear about a flying donkey, you don't even think anything about transportation.
That's not our transportation these days, but it was.
So when it comes to interpreting Scripture, there's a lot of different aspects to just seeing the most truth in it.
But even in Judaism, I believe there are five levels to truth in Scripture, and it's, like, every part of Scripture has five different levels of truth to it.
It's not just, is it true or not? It's, like, how is—what are the different ways in which Scripture?
Let's still man the opposition a bit, though. Why do we need Scripture? Why can't we just start doing metaphysics from first principles?
I think—I mean, maybe you could, but, like, how much time would it take for you to do it, and can everybody do that?
It's, like, the question. I mean, maybe some people did, and that's where Scripture came from.
But you think it could be done without it, in principle?
If you're doing it from first principles, then it's going to be very opportune.
I would say that from—when I say first principles, I mean, like, I think that that would end up—if you really did it from first principles,
I think it would end up basically being a communication between you and God.
I think it would be—it's not just that you're just deducing it.
You're interacting with God at that point, and then you probably end up, like, being written into Scripture as a prophet,
or you wrote part of the Gospels, or things like that.
And, you know—
I'm actually on the other side of this. At least for my belief, I think that certain kinds of wisdom can only come from God.
And, like, there's this idea of—so there's two things, and I want to tease them apart here.
There's this idea of divine inspiration as, uh, was the Scripture just sort of written by humans who were doing first principles of metaphysics?
Or was it God communicating through humans in some way?
And then there's also something, which I want to make it clear, that I'm less on the side of, which can get conflated,
which is, uh, what's called autographical, which is, like, are the Scriptures we have now exactly what was communicated by God?
And I'm—they're translated, and there's obvious reasons why that's not true.
But I think if you have the divine inspiration argument, that is one of the responses to the Steel Man on sort of this first principles of metaphysics is
there are things which are obvious to us as—you're a mathematics guy, right?
And I am sure there are proofs that you've seen where you can go through the proof and say, yes, this is true,
and you never could have come up with that proof on your own.
Oh, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah, and I've had the same experience.
And I think the divine inspiration argument is kind of that this applies where there's a mind that's higher than ours,
and that mind can illustrate to us why these things are true in the same way someone could write a mathematical proof,
and you're like, okay, yeah, this checks out.
But we couldn't have generated some of that ourselves.
I 100% agree with that.
That's not what I—when I said earlier, I don't think we were in as much of a disagreement as it seemed.
And what I mean is that I think God shows people things that when he knows that they will understand them.
So I think that there's a part of this that God picks the person who is able to understand what he's going to show them.
And then it is divinely inspired, but it's also that they were at a point in which they were able to understand what they—what God was showing them.
So I think it's actually—I think it's kind of more of an interaction than it is—it's not just—it's not from the person alone.
And it's not quite directly from God either.
I think interaction is a good word.
It's an interaction, but it's not—I don't think it could be possible if it wasn't an interaction.
But, I mean, if God chose not to give you certain wisdom, I don't think you would find it just by doing the first principles.
I think that he does—you know, he would want you to understand.
If he's going to tell you something, he definitely wants you to understand it.
Real quick, and then I want to hear what Michael has to say.
But real quick, is your view similar to what we're saying, or is it—
I think my view is a little different because the nature of scripture in Hinduism is a little different to the nature of scripture in the Abrahamic religions.
I was curious about this.
As I said, our fundamental layer of scriptures are duly ritual and metaphysical.
And so if you open up the Upanishads, what you will find is essentially first principles argumentation without much appeal to revelation.
Is it the commentary?
Yeah.
Okay, that's true in Judaism.
There's the Talmud.
Yeah.
It's the same exact thing.
It's just a logical commentary on scripture, which is divinely inspired, which is the—
It's kind of odd to me, though, because those commentaries are themselves considered divinely inspired.
Because canonically, the authors of the commentaries are considered to be sages who are like sons of the gods.
Or, you know, god.
But the esoteric interpretations of sons of the gods, of course, is just people who are enlightened.
Wait a minute.
Esoteric?
Yeah.
Is that how you say it?
I thought it was esoteric.
Either way works.
Oh, esoteric is the esoteric way to say esoteric.
And so, like, in this sense, a lot of what you'll find, like, for instance, from the Indian subcontinent Buddhism,
if you read early Buddhist texts, they're not so much repudiating the, you know, doctrinal, like, the revelatory character of Hindu doctrine.
That's not what they're engaging with.
They're engaging with the arguments.
So, I'd say to a greater extent than in the early Abrahamic tradition, in the later Abrahamic tradition, this changes with scholasticism and so on.
The emphasis is more on argument, although the base layers of the Vedic texts, the Vedas themselves, they are taken as revelation.
But their revelatory status, I'd say, is heavily de-emphasized compared to the Abrahamic religions.
Very interesting.
And I can see you champing at the bit, Michael.
Yeah.
It's more like I want more information about, like, this first principles idea.
Like, what exactly are we trying, are you, what do you be trying to build and what would you be starting from?
Like, what assumption?
Well, let's imagine it as a Cartesian project, right?
You're a Rene Descartes, you're sitting in front of your fire, you see the fire burning in front of you, and you wonder whether that's an actual fire or whether you're dreaming that there's a fire in front of you.
And you go on and you try to write a metaphysical framework that captures all the intricacies of the world.
That's essentially what I mean by first principles.
And St. Thomas Aquinas, like, the five ways, and not just that, but all of the logic behind them.
People only talk about the end product, but all of, like, the lead-up to them.
Yeah.
That's a really good example, I think, of this kind of first principles of metaphysics.
In that case, why would, like, you come up with the idea that there exist these things such as gods at all?
Like, from my perspective, the term gods is just this, like, label that you can really give to anything.
It's not really well-defined.
That's why we should define god really quick, because I think, we talked about this a little bit, is that I think that there is a logical, I mean, sure, you could call that chair god, but, like, that's not, why not just call it a...
Or like Connie would say he's a god.
What was that?
Or like Connie would say he's a god.
Many people in history have said they are a god.
Yes, many people have, and we could call this water bottle god, but, like, then why, if that's the case, why not just call it a water bottle?
Why do we have to call it a god?
We already have the term water bottle.
God just fell.
God just fell.
God is there.
But then, you know, we already have the term chair, so, like, what's the, we need a term for that thing, or that being that is, doesn't, you know, have another, another, that has a unique label of it.
And I would say that, logically, there's, I mean, I think, universally, god basically means the someone at the top.
The someone that is also all, the all-encompassing someone, the all-encompassing being that is sentient existence, and that we all are within.
The way I like to put it is that god is no thing, but not nothing.
Someone.
Someone, I see it.
Yeah, someone, well, yeah, person.
This is, this is why.
That's some bars.
This is good.
I like that.
I mean, you don't like that.
Oh, well, I, I use the word, I use the word thing for the rhyme.
Yeah, I know.
I get why you'd object.
But I, people, when people say, it is no thing, that doesn't, it's like, that doesn't tell us what it is, and, like, so if you say, that's why I like saying, he's someone.
Someone is better than saying, he's no thing.
It's like, yeah, he is no thing, because he's, he's a being, but he's someone, he's like the moral.
Well, I think no thing.
That tells us something about him.
No thing, but not nothing tells you in particular what he is, right?
Because if he's no thing, then you can't identify him with any particular thing we might find in the world, say, be it physical objects or abstract objects or anything like that.
But if you say he's not nothing, you know he's not substanceless either.
There must be some substance there.
And so, I think the only thing, unless you guys come up with something else, I'd say the only thing that can fit the category of no thing but not nothing is, yeah, something that guarantees exist, a being that guarantees existence itself, pure being.
Yeah, I understand, in a sense.
Okay, this is going to sound ridiculous, and that's because it is ridiculous.
Well, go ahead.
But what if some hyper astronomically large, like, inter, like, hyperdimensional pigeon-like thing was, like, maybe multi-personality disorder came by and just, like, ate the universe, but because everything is, like, so far away from the edge of the universe, it doesn't really affect anything whatsoever.
And that, we would all be inside that, like, weird pigeon thing.
Would you consider that pigeon thing a god?
No, because you just described the pigeon thing as a hyperdimensional weird pigeon thing, which is a definite description, so it's not no thing.
And I think we talked about...
By this logic, the only things which can be gods are things which are always called gods.
But see, that's the thing, it's like, god, it is my definition.
I'm fine with this.
I would say my definition of god would be one, the one being that is initial, and so it's like, it is existence itself.
And so, if I, you can't, to even say gods is to misdefine the term, almost, but I would, but here's to another important aspect of what's initial.
Would you say that you can give necessary, but you can never give a sufficient explanation of god?
Would you say that's the way, and by necessary versus sufficient, I mean, like, part of the aspect, so we, we can't say god is the first mover.
So we are describing god in some way, but we couldn't, if we, God is the first mover, but if we had all the time in the world, we couldn't provide a complete description of everything god is.
This is exactly what I was going to get at, which is, I think, this is like, so let's say an alien comes down, and they are, you want them to know about you, to understand you.
Let's just say, like, they need to be able to understand you, and you're like, okay, what would you want them to understand about you in order to understand you?
And you could say, okay, well, they, a way would, some people might say, oh, I want them to understand that we are hairless primates that eat, you know, like meat and vegetables, and that we need to drink water every three days, or else we're going to die.
Like, and then somebody, but let's say they understood that, and anything else about you, but then, would they really, does that really mean that they understand you?
And then, if you ask this question, what if they just, all they understood about you was that you were a sentient being that was, had experience and feeling, and goals and will.
Like, basically, you are a sentient being.
Like, would they understand you as you, as being a you, as being a something?
So, I think the way I'd resolve this is, I'd say, for instance, you know, with the various descriptions that we've come up with here, we can pick out God.
We can be sure that we're talking about God, because, you know, there's certain properties other things don't have, that, you know, via negativa, God seems to have.
I don't know what first mover means, really.
First mover means everything, like the thing at the beginning of the very long train of causality, of all causality.
I think I'm the most skeptical here about causation existing, but I'll go ahead and I'll describe Aristotle's original argument for the first mover.
So, suppose, you know, event A has a cause, call it A prime, right?
And A prime has a cause, call it A double prime.
Basically, you could keep going back, but if you keep going back, you'll reach an infinite chain of causes.
But the universe existence, there's not an infinite number of objects, there's a finite number of objects.
So, at some point, something must terminate the chain, and sort of, you know, you can consider this as A1, label this A1 instead of A prime with, like, multiple.
And this first thing, this first mover that causes everything else to come after it, that's God.
I think there are a number of problems with this argument.
It's not my preferred argument for establishing the existence of God, but it's a very old one, and it's a pretty good one.
And you have to acknowledge it if you're talking about the topic.
Exactly.
Okay, I appreciate it. Thank you for telling me.
No problem.
So, getting back to...
We don't have to get back. We can let the conversation keep wandering, but...
I am interested in deistic evolution.
What is...
We've talked about what our response is to folks who are within our religions in terms of sort of literalism and why aren't you...
Why don't you really believe that?
I think that would be what's often said.
Like, so you don't really believe this, and what they mean is you don't really believe it literally.
What is your response to atheists who would say, oh, by being a deistic evolutionist, you're just trying to have your cake and eat it too, and have your nice comforting religion, but still, you know, believe the things that seem scientifically like theirs.
What would your response to that be?
I would say that, you know, they do not have explanations for the jumps from molecules to cells or from cells to multicellular organisms.
And that, yeah, that doesn't mean that it was God, but they don't know that it's not.
And, like, sure, there is definitely adaptation in the world.
We know that.
People have known that.
People who are theists have known that forever.
Where do you think that, you know, domesticated animals came from?
Do you think that that, like, was an atheist invention?
Or do you think that, like, people were domesticating animals and breeding them for traits and domesticating crops and, you know, pollinating and germinating, you know, vegetables with certain properties?
I mean, this has been going on for a long time.
I think it was the guy who did the punnet—he did the peas.
He experimented them.
Mendel.
Yeah, Mendel, right?
Mendel, yeah.
Okay, and, like, I should have trusted my instinct on that.
But, then, it's like, wasn't he a monk?
Yep.
A Christian monk?
Yeah.
There's a rich history of, like, Christians creating important scientific individuals.
Not just Christians, but, like, religious people.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
Honestly, for this one, I think it's just because most people were religious.
I disagree.
I think that, actually, a lot of the minds who really make scientific leaps forward have to have some kind of understanding of reality that is, you know, I would say true.
And, as a theist, I would say that it makes sense that they were theists.
As much as I'd like that to be true, if you look at scientists nowadays, most are atheists.
Yeah, but that's why we're stalled.
I think, like, against all of human history, many of the people who made these important innovations, it seems like maybe there's some weird selection effects.
Historical things are always weird to talk about.
But it seems like many of these people were not just religious, but they were devoutly, fervently, passionately religious.
And I would say your argument that sort of, you know, the average person was religious doesn't necessarily imply the same way.
Because there's never been a time in history where the average person is devoutly, fervently, passionately religious.
The average person is, like, a farmer, and they do some of the practices.
And they would say, I adhere to these sets of beliefs, and they do adhere to them.
I'd have to disagree a little bit.
For instance, if you go back to the Middle Ages in Europe or even Asia, you could pick up a random, you know, village peasant.
They might not have theological erudition or knowledge that, say, a priest would, for example.
But they would very much believe in, you know, evil spirits and God protecting them from evil spirits.
The sincerity of the belief would be very devout.
And I think the sincerity of the belief would be just as devout in the intellectuals at the time.
I think maybe what you guys are getting at is, I think what's being observed here is that the people who tend to make scientific discoveries tend to be intellectually serious.
And those who were intellectually serious before atheism and agnosticism sort of became the intellectual norm are more likely to contemplate the idea of God seriously and make it a centerpiece of their worldview.
Now, perhaps if religious belief was not, you know, stigmatized in academic spheres like it was today, do I think scientists would be making more, like, you know, have more substantive theological thoughts?
For sure.
I mean, Einstein professed belief in sort of Spinoza's pantheism as, you know, like one prominent example.
But it's like, I mean, Spinoza is a whole can of worms, but essentially it's belief that God is the universe in some sense.
It's kind of very similar to the days.
So my question for you guys, and I have my own thoughts on this, but I first kind of want to hear, like, what your thoughts are.
It's like, where do you think that this came from, this current state of where, you know, a anti-theistic academia, culture and academia?
Yeah.
Logical positivism.
Who is it?
Is it AJ Iyer?
AJ Iyer was one of them.
Carnap was another.
Yeah.
This idea that if you can't measure something, if you can't falsify something empirically, it's not worth talking about.
Which is like consciousness.
Yeah.
So it's like that's, I mean.
Well, and I don't think, I don't think it's, there's certainly strong philosophers who believe this, but I don't think the viewpoint itself is like a very strong philosophical viewpoint.
In terms of, there's philosophical viewpoints that I disagree with, but for me to explain why I disagree with them would take a long time.
And for me, that would be the mark of a strong philosophical viewpoint is it's like very hard to say why I disagree with it, not just because it's complicated, but because it's very well argued.
And I don't view logical positivism as even really strong in that sense.
Another thing I'd say is like there has been a trend in the past four or five hundred years, you know, empires consolidating control around the world in like increase in religious literalism and a sort of like simple devotionalism that happened parallel with many of the great discoveries of the scientific age.
And I think, I will say, if you are a religious literalist and you're seeing all these advances in science made and you think that literalism is the only approach to religion, then yeah, you're screwed.
There's no tenable way to stay religious.
But if you drop the literalism, if that was dropped in more people's theologies, I feel more people would be religious.
And this, I think, a piece of evidence for this trend is in this spiritual but not religious attitude that you see going around in a lot of people.
Right. It's often a person in an environment where there's a lot of literalist belief or they have a literalist background, which they reject.
Yeah. But they don't necessarily reject the metaphysical inclination towards believing in a God.
So they're kind of in this awkward position where they're like, you know, my soul kind of needs these spiritual ideas to nourish it.
But I reject literalism.
And that's about it.
I'm curious. I think Tyler and I would call ourselves partial literalists.
Yeah.
Would you consider yourself a partial literalist or a fully non-literalist?
Partial literalist.
Okay. So we're all partial literalists.
So when we're talking about sort of literalism, we mean it in the sense that you view all of the scriptures as literalists.
Yeah.
Like literally every single word to be interpreted entirely literally.
I don't even know how much I would say partial literalism, but I would say partial literalism within our current life translations.
But, you know, it's interesting because in the beginning of the Genesis, when it's talking about like God, you know, he, there's, here, let me, I actually wrote this down many, many years ago when I was like just becoming a theistist.
But it says in the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth and the earth was without form and void and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
Um, and God moved upon the face of the waters and then God said, let there be light.
And I, I started thinking more about this.
And then I was like, in the beginning time, God created the heavens kind of space and the earth matter.
And the earth matter was without void was without, uh, form meaning like disorderly chaotic and void, AKA like empty, lacking and darkness, like not awareness was upon the face.
Like, and I thought of like actually geometry, like the surface of the deep, which is like, you have like a flat plane and then you have like a, the deep is like you've added like volume.
So now you have this vessel basically, this, and then you have water, the waters is like what fills a vessel.
Then you have God's movement.
And it's like, you're adding all, it's, it's almost like a geometric description of like world building of this, of this.
And, and, but if you're a literalist and you're like the, the face of the deep, it's like, well, what does that even mean?
You know, like, and, and the waters, it's like where he has, has that even been, does it mean like the ocean?
Or does it mean like the puddles?
Like, and I think that it's, but it, I think it's a little bit deeper than that.
I think that I, I wouldn't necessarily say that I'm not a literalist about this.
It's just, I'm not necessarily sure that we've interpreted this correctly in the mainstream of religious culture.
Can I, can I just like, um, raise a point, which most people don't really seem to talk about in these kinds of debates?
So.
Well, I don't know if this is a debate.
I think we all mostly agree on most of what we're talking about.
Yeah, whatever.
This would be a poor debate if that's what we were trying to do.
Whatever this thing is.
So.
People like, um, if they want to like take, um, like Bible things like, like completely literally and think that like God, like individually.
And they want to think that like God created like all like the individual like animals, um, like by hand.
Um, they could just like, instead bring like interpret it in a different way.
And, um, they could just assume that like, well, like there's like a different way that like that could like go down.
Like hypothetically speaking, if like the God were like all powerful, they could just, um, go up, go up to the world, which had just like formed due to like natural like processes.
Say, oh, and so and so billion years, I want, um, like so and so to be the case.
Like there to be like these like animals with these certain properties and something.
And if they are like actually all powerful, then that can actually just be like willed to happen.
And that would just like, the reality would just like confort to have that happen the most natural way.
And then he would just have like evolution occur naturally.
And like, you could say that God will like kind of those like organisms to come into existence.
But they did still like naturally pop into existence and evolve naturally via natural mechanisms.
So, so I've, I've had people, uh, I've said similar things with people before and their response is always, well, uh,
um, why would God do that when he could just put everything down?
You know, here's a horse, here's a human.
I mean, and I, I, I think, uh, there's like an appeal to parsimony basically.
And I think my response is, um, I don't know if you view the same, but, but part of sort of God's nature is to.
Okay.
Like it's, it's to make his, his glory as clear as possible.
And this is, and, and, and what I mean by glory is like sort of God is big and God's something that it should be, we should wonder at.
Yes.
And I think to me, evolution is extraordinarily glorifying to God.
I think we all agree that this process is, it's beautiful.
It's amazing to study.
It's amazing.
And, and, and these adaptive properties and the complex interactions and everything.
And to me, that strengthens my belief in God much more than the belief, I, I call like sort of the literal creationist belief, uh, a model train God, where it was like an old man with a model train set and he puts a tree here and a train here.
It's not even, that's much less glorious than a God that creates this crazy, beautiful complex process.
It's not even a, I don't even think it is a, when people use that as like, that's parsimony.
I don't even think that that's actually the parsimony is like, uh, like, uh, I would, I would actually say that like what we're, what you were saying and what we're, I would say we are in agreement.
Like that's actually more parsimonious when you're just taking, you know, when you're talking about fundamental causality, then just, you know, train set God is like, I'm going to make ostriches.
And it's like, but I mean, but I totally agree with you.
I mean, if you look at just like, sometimes I'll just be, you know, if you look at just like, um, I don't know, any really, any animal we're close enough or any, you know, part of nature, I would say close enough, but there's some very obvious examples of like a Quetzel, like Quetzel bird.
And it's like, it's like a magnificent creature, you know, and it's like, you just look at that.
And sometimes I'm just, it's just amazing.
Like God, he's just creates such a beautiful world.
And that, and part of that beauty is that it changes.
I think it's, it's not just, you know, it's like, this is a, this is an action that's going on.
But what's really interesting is what doesn't change is the fundamental principles that set this into motion as well.
The beauty emerges from those, from the, you know, principles of mathematics and physics and how they manifest in the sciences.
I mean, right now there's a deep convergence of ideas in machine learning and physics, like physics-based approaches to machine learning are becoming more and more popular.
And it seems that I see the capacity that humans have and all beings have really for making analogies as kind of reflecting the mind of God in a sense.
Because, you know, in order to create such a complex sort of world, to give rise to such a complex world that has seemingly simple descriptions,
you sort of need the capacity to see similarities between things that seem very different, very divergent on the surface and trace them back to the same root.
And so when I think about our cognitive capacity, when I think about the way we approach science and mathematics through analogy,
I kind of see us as reflecting, you know, this is like a blessing from God in a sense, the ability to take these analogies.
And if you, real quick, I mean, if you just also think about this process as a whole,
differentiation of sentience is what kind of creates meaning in the first place,
which means like we have to have the ability to make choices.
God has to have the ability to make choices.
And if you take that into context of, you know, causality, it's like, this has got to be a process.
It can't, this has to be done through a process.
It can't just be, you know, like you said, this train set God is like, I'm going to make wolves and lions.
It has to be this process in which that allows for multiplicity of being and interaction and growth at the same time.
And, and we've got to wrap up here.
And I think this might be a nice way to wrap things up.
This has been a very religious echolapno episode.
And I think part of religion is that you have truths that are really important.
And I wonder if we want to wrap up and go around and just say a truth that's really important to you personally,
that you want other people to know.
If you guys think that would be good.
If you guys are, if you guys are good with that, if not, we can end on something else.
But I thought that it could be a cool way to, yeah, you can start.
You should start.
Oh, okay.
I would say my truth is that no matter who you are or what you've done,
God loves you deeply and desires a personal relationship with you.
And that you taking up that opportunity can be one of the most rewarding things ever.
I'd say when you venerate anything at all in the world, you're venerating the supreme being.
Don't forget that.
That's a good one.
I would say that God's nature is that of oneness and the fact that we are here and that there are multiple beings here means he had to make a choice for you to be here.
And I think that every single someone that exists within God was an intentional choice that he made for you to be here.
And you were here for a reason.
That's beautiful.
I don't really think things like morality or meaning are really treasured to the existence of any like gods or eldritch horrors.
Like kind of, I guess, indifferent about it all.
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
This is cool.
Yeah.
I'm on danielvanzant.com.
And I love talking about this stuff and I don't get a lot of a chance to because I'm an academic and there's stigma against this.
So if you want to talk about this stuff, please talk to me.
Email me.
I talk about this on my YouTube channel every week.
And it's Theory of Everyone and I also have a website, sentientsingularity.com.
Yeah.
I'm Sephal Ariel.
You'll find me.
Yes.
He's also on the channel.
And Michael is also.
Yeah.
And your subsec, quickly, your new post.
Oh, yeah.
In one minute or less.
I made a write-up about dimensional collapsor theory.
It's not the best put together, but I'm going to make future posts about the topics in a more coherent manner.
Like, it's a decent enough read, so, like, look at it.
Okay, bye.
All right.
That's it.
