Hi, my name is Thiruvenka Thiru Toda.
I'm a graduate student at Taos, I'm studying computer engineering.
And this is my presentation on thermodynamical properties of
self-sumidarity and collective intelligence.
Deepak, so what is the motivation behind this topic?
So I was listening to Dr. Wilkram Prezen and
he started talking about a problem regarding cellular automata and
stress. It got me thinking about how I could map it myself.
And then I was interested in practice because one thing about practice is that
they kind of auto-complete, right? And I was curious like how does
a natural element like understand how it completes the cells?
So then I got, and then I read Levin's work.
Michael Levin's work.
Michael Levin's work, right?
So I saw a pattern in Levin's work.
Levin, you should talk a lot.
He was talking about how stress,
stress sharing kind of acted like a collective intelligence in the system.
But one thing I found interesting is that he would always mention elements of
thermodynamics, but there was never a view from the point of thermodynamics.
I didn't understand why he wouldn't mention thermodynamics.
I'm not trying to debate what Michael Levin wrote.
I'm trying to give a perspective from the point of thermodynamics.
So, the natural question is, in Levin's paper,
stress sharing as a cognitive group of collective intelligence,
he kind of goes on to explain like how a lizard's tail, once chopped off, uses the stress
stress in the cells to combine again, right?
So, if I'm going to present a case for thermodynamics as the basis for connection,
I need to look at like history, right? I mean, is there already a paper present?
I found a paper which talked about how thermodynamics could be used to connect biological cells.
So, in this paper, they found a way to describe how a cut would heal itself through thermodynamics.
I found that really interesting.
And this was just like helping me build on that idea of using thermodynamics.
And then I found this another paper talking about collective intelligence through thermodynamics.
This was a paper which I actually saw before in Santa Fe, like Santa Fe Institute was talking about this.
And I was like, okay, that's pretty interesting.
Like they talk about like intelligence through a framework of thermodynamics.
And then one thing I noticed was I recognized a pattern, right?
Like there was a pattern in all of like cells, like a repeating pattern.
And in Brown University actually they came out suggesting that, they came out saying that,
yeah, there are fractal patterns in cells.
And fractal patterns are actually pretty universal.
So, this is a fractal pattern in nature, right?
So, I wanted to introduce like this one concept which I read before called fractal thermodynamics.
And fractal thermodynamics kind of incorporates the idea of thermodynamics at the same time
using fractals and this ensures continuity.
So, this is actually kind of like inspired by what Penrose once wrote in his book, Road to Reality.
So, I just like look into this phenomenon more and
sorry, yeah, so
there are some phenomena which when I, we had like Sinclair and one other Russian professor.
Yeah, he mentions how epigenetic clocks for each organ is different, right?
So, if each organ has its own epigenetic clock, I asked him a question.
So, does having a warm temperature affect the epigenetic clock?
What he told me was warm temperatures can negatively affect an epigenetic clock.
I think Sinclair talks about this idea.
So, my understanding of that was, okay, what if you introduced like, isn't that like thermodynamics?
Like, isn't that like, like even the tail when it grows back, even Levin talks about this.
There's a lot of stress according to Levin.
But he never mentions it as like a way for the system to calm itself down.
Because whenever in thermodynamics system, there's a lot of energy
cools itself down by like my building.
So, it got me thinking like, okay, if this is taking place on a cellular level,
like a system trying to balance itself out, and he explains it through homeostasis, I'm sorry.
So, he explains it through that way and
yeah, so
So, I'm trying to like, not trying to, but I'm trying to like give a lens to you guys that
maybe there's a way to explain morphogenesis through fractal thermodynamics.
And the questions I want to explore is like
all this while I've gone ahead with an assumption of genetic history.
There are ways to explore this through MARPA models.
And this is actually talked about a lot in Santa Fe Institute since 1998, actually.
So, yeah, this epigenetic block of the lizard's tail.
I saw a lot of heat, papers were describing how heat was being produced,
like a distressed signal from the cells.
What if that's like increasing the epigenetic block?
Because morphogenesis does affect a genetic block, a genetic block according to some
tables of it, and maybe that's like, you know, causing it.
And I want to like explore how we could use like fractal calculus, I think
something's interesting about that.
That's my presentation, thank you.
Go.
So there is, in the way that the brain represents information, multi-fractality,
which means there's a continuum of exponents that represent different aspects of how the brain is
representing the world.
And, you know, there's this like corollary of information dynamics and thermodynamics and sort of
entropy as a unified force, you know, for thinking of this idea of, you know, fractal thermodynamics.
Interestingly enough, the brain operates at the state of quasi-criticality, which is essentially a
threshold where it's able to propagate information through the brain, but not only through the brain,
the entire nervous system is connected in that feedback loop.
And so that might have to do with a lot of how the body regulates itself from all scales.
And it's interesting because you can also look at much larger scales, such as where does our food
come from and how and what types of food allow certain kinds of processes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And like, apart from the brain, there's this concept called fractal graphality.
So a lot of, like, natural systems use that.
And one thing I've noticed is, like,
like, entropy is a measure of time.
Because, like, when the universe is created, like, we use the direction to entropy, right?
So, I feel like you can kind of, like, if you, because what is time, right?
So, is it, like, you want to, can you use entropy as a measure?
So, I don't know.
I'm sorry.
One-liner comments for the next speaker.
There's a publication within the last few weeks by John Speakman, his last author,
and he specifically addressed what you were discussing, the second point regarding metabolism,
connection with aging and biology.
And he looked at caloric restriction versus protein restriction, which through independent
mechanisms may delay aging and somehow organisms in contact.
And looking at the percentage of difference of the expected variance accounted for by the
thermodynamic differences that, as an energy source, that explain the majority.
Can I just say something to what you're saying?
So, a lizard slave, when it's chopped up and regrows again, it actually grows back
in a different pattern.
It significantly works.
So, I want to understand, like, the cellular change, I think, and, like,
how, what, what would happen if you starve the lizard and how would the tail go back, you know,
like, that's something I want to.
