Hi, my name is Jawad Ahmed, and these are my students, I'm Dabu Bashir, I'm Dabu Naeem, and Hubek.
We are first semester grad students, and today we are presenting our proposal called Longevity to WEC,
which is inspired by Pathway to WEC.
So, first of all, what are GNNs and how we can use GNNs to analyze relational chip analysis?
So, first of all, what are GNNs?
GNNs are machine learning models that can use the input of a graph
and then use the relationship between the nodes to represent how these can be used
to provide the insight between the nodes and between the biomarkers.
Speak a little louder.
So, on the right-hand side, you can see the biomarkers are represented by the nodes,
like for the first, like the BMI, the blood pressure, the sugar, blood sugar,
water temperature, and the pulse, and the dotted lines represent the unrelational chip node data between them.
But if you put that input into the GNNs and apply neural networks to them,
on the right-hand side, you can see that the intensity of the edges between them represent
how each of these biomarkers are connected with each other.
For example, if a person's stress goes high, it has a direct correlation between the blood sugar,
the BMI, or the blood pressure.
But if the stress goes high, it has very less correlation with how the body temperature
or the pulse of the person changes.
Now, Hamza, Mubashir will further tell how Pathway to Vect we use it in neural networks.
Yeah, so this is kind of the backbone over here.
Pathway to Vector is basically our approach to get the beddings out of our data from biomarkers.
And what we're doing basically here is that our bottom node here,
GNNs basically were a two-dimensional space where we were representing each node
as each individual biomarker and seeing relationship between them.
But what Pathway to Vector allows us is to kind of get this hierarchical representation
where there is a web of a network of represent relationships between each node.
So in the bottom-most layer, you have your enzyme, which can contribute to the chemical reactions
of compounds.
The compounds then are associated with those enzymes.
And at the end of the day, a pathway associated with a couple of compounds represents this metabolic
function or a chemical reaction.
Now, you're trying to find out if you map this out into 2D vector space.
The points that are closer together over here, these are your pathways.
Similar pathways, marked together in the 2D vector space, if they're close together,
represent that they are associated to a similar biochemical function or a metabolic function.
Now, just and rust, because you need to find these relationships are methods of how you can move
through these pathways and find out which relationships are working.
Just basically allows you to do that in a direct way, but rust allows you to do that indirectly
with diversification where you can now move back to even your enzymes or to your neighboring compounds as well.
Now, how is this related to longevity and how are we moving forward with this?
Consider this graph on the left to be your pathway profile from when you were aged to 10.
And the one on the right to be when you were aged 20.
These pathway profiles change over time.
Your metabolic functions, your body, biochemical reactions within your body do change.
And what we're trying to evaluate is how we can quantify what we call aging, the aging process.
So, say for instance, when you're mapping this, those compounds into this 2D vector space,
they've deviated from their position over here to somewhere over there.
Your pathway functions, which are basically representing your metabolic functions, have also deviated.
And we're trying to find out how basically everything that we experienced as we aged
and we quantified into 2D vector spaces basically using graphs.
So, now Hamzarin will explain how the longevity 2 vector model is going to be using pathway 2 vector to do this.
Okay, so this is where we propose our longevity 2 vector.
So, as Hamzarin explained that it is based upon pathway 2 vector.
So, basically what this represents is that as age 10, 20 and through 70, 80,
through early ages to year old ages, it represents the basically network pathways of a specific individual
that is the relationship between their enzymes, compounds and different pathways.
So, what we do is that either you can take it for an individual or you can also take it for an individual
and their close relatives as well because you know that some of the genes that are related to aging
comes from basically your genetics as well.
So, what we do is that each simultaneously the two pathways are basically go to different layers.
So, the difference layer here is where we basically capture the essence of the difference between two pathway vectors.
For example, what changed from year 10 from when he was 10 years or when he was 20 years, what changed?
What compounds were different? What enzymes were acting as a catalyst when he was 20 and what enzymes were thinking as a catalyst when he was 10?
So, basically this difference layer can produce embeddings that are age specific.
For example, the first embedding here would be the age specific embedding for when he was 10 to 20 years old.
You can basically differentiate between these dams to basically get more intrinsic results like you can get at 10 and 15 as well.
But this difference layer basically it will produce another list of embeddings that are basically pinpoint to those changes
that basically leads to aging or different biological processes that are changing when a person basically grows.
So, what we do is then these embeddings are go to transformer where the sort of magic happens.
What transformer does is it basically learns the temporal sequence between these embeddings.
Now, those temporal sequence once learned can be used to pinpoint specific actionable insights as well as
which compounds and which enzymes are differentiating along the lifespan of a person.
For example, the one actionable insight here is energy metabolism.
For example, when you age up, basically when you age, you see that your energy starts to decline.
And when your energy starts to decline usually that may lead to any other, for example,
maybe mitochondria or something like that.
So, what happens is that you can based on these insights do an intervention.
That intervention can be chemical, scientific or even lifestyle changes.
Based on those interventions, you can basically fight the aging process.
This can happen in the neotrophic factor, which is basically the study of your nerves
and how they are growing or how they are declining.
And then circadian rhythm and basically autonomic stability, where basically your DNA is damaging.
Now, applications will be done by Cobert.
So far, we have learned that using longevity to work, what we are doing is we are understanding
how pathways are changing over time for any individual.
So, using those, using our understanding of these changes, what we can do is we can
understand, we can predict how their lifespan will be.
Like, if the person pathway is such that his or her immune system is decreasing, so you would not
live a very healthy life statistically.
So, what intervention can be that we advise some medical changes, some lifestyle changes,
so that their pathway in the next year would be better, right?
So, we are understanding the underlying principle behind the aging mechanism,
using this pathway relationship, pathway enzymes and compounds, and using that,
as we are understanding what compounds are decreasing, what enzymes are decreasing,
how the pathways are changing over time.
We can also recommend some, we can do some drug discovery that the person has a lower enzyme A,
right?
So, what we can do is we can scientifically modify or we can scientifically modify and they recommend some
drugs which might already be present or we can recommend some life-style changes.
So, as each person has a unique profile, every person has slightly different profiles, so all of
these things can be like personalized, so they can be personalized anti-aging treatments,
which can help slow down the process like the person was doing, right?
Or they can, and if we can also like, if this works quite well, then slightly reverse the biological
age as well.
Similarly, as we can see, we know that as we grow older, our mental health and the brain scans change
over time, by understanding and using this approach, we can start understanding the underlying
principle how these effects are actually getting mapped to the pathways, compounds, and enzymes.
And then, we recommend some anti-aging or slowing the aging process theories.
Thanks.
Thank you.
So, do you guys have any demonstration?
Okay, Chair.
No, we have an abstract that's submitted.
This is, we built this upon the pathway to Victor, so this is completely novel.
This is the first time anyone sees it.
Okay.
Questions, Chair?
Yes, go.
Looks like you're training on MOCA's Oten Hallmarks of Aging Criteria for your modeling.
Do you have any more proximate gold standards that you're using for next step?
And have you done any comparative work based on other, not just epigenetic, but other OMICs,
functional hybrid indices as a gold standard in which you're comparing them against?
Okay.
So, we, what pathway to WIC was basically is just an idea to represent this into higher vector spaces,
to analyze this, but after that, its release in 2020, Cancer2WIC was also released with using
this similar terminology.
So, what we're trying to do is basically use that understanding over here as well.
And because we're machine learning engineers primarily, the biologics involved in this,
we're not really familiar with that, but using the same terminologies that Cancer2WIC was basically
doing that across a group of diverse people. What we're doing that is do that vertically with
temporal dimension instead of doing it on a large amount of people, we're just doing that in time
for a single person so that we can give them personalized drug rediscovery and, for example,
personalized insights to improve their own level.
It's just like how you are measuring RDWs for a person for a long period of time.
Yeah. And if you don't have that data for that specific person, you can use nearby,
near relatives for that purpose because they have similar kind of genetics and can probably infer
information that can be useful.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
So, let's say you had five pathways, right, and one of them was out of whack or aged.
So, I guess you guys would come up with the algorithm to pick the intervention which would
fix that one that's out of whack to get it to be younger, right?
Exactly.
But what happens if then that messes up two others?
How do you reframe the algorithm in that?
Okay. So, once you're, for example, taking me, for instance, you're age 10, you're age 20,
you don't know about what you're going to be when you're going to be at the state you're going to be at age 30.
And if an intervention is done at age 20, you have a relevance of say your parents who were at age 30 or 40,
those relatives are giving you an indication of if you move with your current trajectory,
you're going to be somewhere around that.
The intervention we do for yourself is at age 20, when you reach age 30.
Those are the two distinguishing features that we're going to be looking at them.
So, it's not like we have the prior information for what's going to be for that specific person.
That is just an approximation of what the future would look like.
So, you're taking the parents, you're looking at, that's a big, that's a big box, right?
So, you're looking at the individual and then you're modeling the intervention based on the parents?
No, we're modeling the intervention based on the person himself.
We're looking at if an intervention was not taken place just for comparison.
Oh, right, right, right.
Yeah.
So, what would that look like?
What was his view?
If it really affects, if it affects positively or negatively,
to cater for that in those instances.
All right.
So, I see that side of it, but then let's focus on the individual.
So, there are five pathways.
You've got one of them that's aged or it's aging faster than the others.
You come up with the intervention that addresses that one, but then two others get worse.
Like, have you factored that in?
Yeah, that's a good question.
So, one other thing that we, was that we will not do this on, like,
like, we will divide the, basically, pathways on age like 10 and 20.
But the first thing was, we'll do it at shorter levels.
But in shorter levels, you don't, basically, find those specific pathways that are changing.
For example, my body is changing every day.
So, basically, if you are looking at long intervals and over a large period of data.
For example, I'm looking for the four of us and different ages from 10 to 18.
And I'm not, basically, generalizing this one from 10 to, from only a small day,
from 10 to 20 might be some different ages.
But from 10 to 80, if there's a specific pathway that is being changed and it's related to energy
or something like that, might like, then we can, basically, strongly say with this,
that maybe by changing this pathway or doing this intervention, we can do this.
And intervention cannot always be, like, scientific or chemical.
It can also be, like, lifestyle.
For example, skating rhythm, you can also just in sleep or different cycles like that or exercise.
But it can be chemical as well.
And when you obviously, when we have data, we'll have more insights on it.
Yeah, I understand what you're trying to say.
And that's a very valid point that if we do an intervention and it ends up messing things up
more than they were before that, but that's where data comes in, right?
So because of this machine learning, as we gain data for the specific purpose and it ends up messing
things up, then those are insights that can basically drive further evaluation as well.
There's another side too.
So if you think of, imagine if you had everything quantified, right?
So if there are 4,000 metabolites, we're able to measure all 4,000, not just whatever we can,
you know, measure right now, it's like 600 to 1,000.
So let's say you're able to measure everything.
If you look at all of them, not necessarily even put them into pathways, you know, you
could technically look at the entropy, which is basically, you know, what that whole,
everything looks like in the youthful state, you know, but if I'm focused on one or two of those
4,000, does that really make a dent, you know, the small weed in the giant forest, but now,
now, you know, you get past a certain level and now you're, now you're starting to be on that age
trajectory.
So it's like looking almost at, you know, the gross data and looking at the, the, the entropy difference
relative to that youthful state rather than just a few, even, even just trying to label it into
pathways may be too narrow.
You've got to look at as much data as you can for as many biomarkers as you can, right?
And then tracking that entropy over time.
And I want to add to Michael's point.
I think the core corollary to that is that there's a concept that you're measuring the subset of
the pathways.
There's also how tightly are those pathways linked to the outcomes that ultimately matter.
Yeah.
We need some, so something to think about is ways to validate if everything you measure
moves in the right direction, that they're actually getting healthier.
Yeah.
I think that's, that's an important feature step.
Yeah.
Basically the bigger pathway relationships, you're trying to say that if the pathway
relationships are stronger enough, that's, we're going into a grassroot level, we need to
zoom out a bit and basically identify those things that are actually making a difference, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, correct.
But it's hard to say sometimes the weeds over a long period of time end up becoming the biggest problem,
right?
Yeah, exactly.
So those are the kind of insights we want to drive out of this.
Okay.
Any other questions?
Any last minute judge questions?
Reminds?
Any judge?
No.
Good.
All right.
Awesome.
