So, my understanding that this group is interested in both AI and aging, so my lab is 50% computational, 50% experimental, and that's basically what we try to do, we try to solve the problem of aging, that's basically in essence what this is.
So, I'll tell you a little bit about how we do this by quantifying aging, longevity, and rejuvenation, because to me, this kind of event has been a major development field.
So, first, when we say aging, we need to ask what is aging, and so you already heard the insights from David Sinclair, so I think it's very, I actually enjoyed his talk, they actually work in the same building on campus, so interesting, and also collaborate, but I will give you this example, because that's actually a very difficult question to answer.
So, I, two years ago, I chaired a conference called Systems Aging, Gordon and Church Conference, so all experts in the field, about 200 people, and we gave a questionnaire to these people, asking the very basic questions, like what is aging, what causes aging, what is rejuvenation, is aging a disease, you know, 10 questions like that, and the answers, over 100 answers, there was not a single point of consensus for any of the questions,
and definitions of aging, and definitions of aging, and the definitions of aging, I tried to cluster them, and this is what basically it is, so, that's not how they answer it, but it's just a kind of summary of what, how people think in general, these are experts in the field,
So, some people think of aging as the increased chance of dying, like, you talk to many demographers, and all of the, like,
Converse equation, and, you know, most of the assays in the field are based on mortality, that's how we study aging, for some people it's mortality, other people say, no,
it's loss of function, with age, we, like, decrease VO2 marks, or, like, muscle strength, or vision, that's aging, other people say, no, it's just a process of continuation of development, we develop, and there's a certain trajectory, and this trajectory continues, and that's aging, other people say, no, it's biological age increase, or damage accumulation, or whatever, any, like, many other kind of features,
in the end, we use word aging, to designate different processes, like, you ask, what do you study aging, what do you study aging, but maybe you study completely different things, of course, many of these are must be manifestations of the aging process, not aging itself, and they can relate to one another, especially related in life, but in order to target aging, we need to understand it, right, we need to find the essence, not just formal definition, but just basically the essence of what is this,
and that's incredibly difficult, so, in another way to look at this, you can say, well, aging may be mortality, but to me, we die because of diseases, right, so, you can look at the, instead, aging as the instance of diseases, like cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer's, heart disease, but diseases are caused by functional decline, and functional decline is caused by accumulation of deleterious changes, such as
So, so, to me, so, to me, I've been thinking more in terms of, like, damage, on the damage side, so, my view on aging is based on damage, basically, and I will tell you a little bit, in more detail of this, I was originally trained as an enzymologist,
but here is basically, and we work with enzymes, yeah, at least used to work, and so, if we consider an enzyme, like enzyme converts a substrate to a product, so, what can we say about this enzyme?
This enzyme has a gene, recorded by a gene, and there's a purpose of this enzyme to convert a substrate to a product, that's the reason we have that gene, we have many genes that code enzymes that do this particular one, but if you look at the enzyme, enzyme is a molecule,
is a molecule, composed of 20 types of amino acids, has a particular structure, and no matter how well the active site is built, it's not perfect reaction, it cannot characterize the reaction perfectly, actually, in chemistry, nothing is perfect in chemistry, therefore, nothing is perfect in biology, too, therefore, there is non-zero likelihood, this enzyme will produce something else, let's call it damage,
it could be a bi-product of mutation, it could be a bi-product, a mutation, or every mutation, whatever, a change, alter the expression of a gene, damage, so now, product,
the conventional product is a function, right, it has a program, we can call it a program, damage is not a program, there's no purpose in making damage, it just happens, because we have this blue process, right, but it's not just any damage,
any damage, this damage, this damage is produced by this particular enzyme, therefore, this feature has this programmatic nature, so that blue is programmed, red is programmatic, but not programmed, and to me, this red is damaged, and therefore, it's aging, in other words, aging is not programmed, it cannot be programmed, there's no purpose in aging, there's no benefit in aging,
there's no purpose in aging, so, on the other hand, genes, they're programmed, they have a particular function, development, it's a program, we can disrupt development,
disrupt the gene, we stop developing, we disrupt the gene for apoptosis, we stop apoptosis, we cannot disrupt aging by, you know, manipulating a gene, there, although, it's very clear that we age very similarly, we have programmatic nature, but it's not programmed, yeah, that's very important,
so, now, we can extend this concept, and say that, this damage, can be represented by, by products, mutations, apoptosis,
mutations, imbalance of protein complex, any, any other, known and unknown forms of damage, we call it, it's kind of similar to cumulative damage, but it's, it's not just damage, because it's a, any negative consequence of being alive, in other words, aging involves, happens, because it's not just damage, but it's not just damage, because it's a, any negative consequence of being alive, in other words,
aging involves, happens, because we are alive, we live, we have processes that do whatever they do, and they produce negative consequences as a, as a result, and these negative consequences accumulate, that's to me, is aging.
So, the important point is that, every similar function contributes to damage, therefore, to aging, there's no major damage form, there's no point studying DNA damage, repair, or like, mitochondria, autophagy, or protein synthesis, aging as a systemic process.
The whole system lives, and therefore, the whole system ages, that's why it's so difficult to describe it, quantify it, and target it.
So far, nobody succeeded in it.
Okay, second.
Oh, another point is antagonistic pleiotropy.
Who, who knows what antagonistic pleiotropy is?
Can you raise hands?
Okay.
Okay.
That, okay.
This, maybe, evolutionary concept, which is the most important in the aging field.
Basically, I'll tell you, it was, Williams proposed about 60 years ago, and that's basically the dominant theory currently in the aging field, called antagonistic pleiotropy.
Basically, the idea is this.
You have a non-aging organism, and then, you evolve a gene variant, or maybe gene, that makes an organism, whether it's kind of in the younger state, you know, better functionally.
It may jump higher, or run faster, or be smarter, or see better.
So, of course, it will be selected, you know, when you preserve that variant, even if that variant will produce some negative consequences later in life.
Right?
You cannot avoid it.
It will be selected, because it's beneficial early in life when organisms reproduce.
And therefore, Williams suggested, it's unavoidable that aging evolves, unavoidable, because these such variants give benefit.
These organisms will outcompete.
But what I'm saying here is this model, it's not correct.
Because if you look at this skin, that's exactly antagonistic pleiotropy.
Basically, every function already has positive, like blue, and negative, red, negative features.
Therefore, every biological function has antagonistic pleiotropy features.
Therefore, antagonistic pleiotropy cannot evolve.
It's there from the very start.
So, of course, it can be used to study changes in lifespan, whether organisms age faster or slower,
but it cannot explain evolution of aging, conversion from non-aging to aging state.
Like bacteria, which don't age in symmetric divide, they have antagonistic pleiotropy features,
because they have these any chemical reactions, or catalyzed reactions.
So, basically, this is my understanding of the aging process.
And with this understanding, we built a research program around this.
And I will tell you how we try to use it to address questions in the field.
First, basically, lab upgrades like that.
We study longevity, and here we study, basically, the potential of the system to live long.
It's not age-related change, it's that when we change longevity, we change the potential.
We, like, convert a short-lived mouse to a longer-lived human.
Yeah?
How can we convert, like, a shorter-lived organism to a longer-lived organism?
And this study is the level of cell types.
Some cells are short-lived, like cells in the blood sometimes live in two days.
And cells in the brain, like neurons, they live whole life, right?
They have same genome, same kind of organization, but, you know, why be different by a cell?
Longevity across mammals.
Mammals have a similar genome size.
They evolve from the same ancestor.
There's a 200-fold difference in lifespan.
Like, some shrooms live in one year, some whales can live 200 years.
So, nature, apparently, can easily change lifespan by manipulating genes and go from, like, one year to 200 years.
How does it do it?
How does it do it?
We try to understand that.
And then, also, longevity across intervention.
Because we now know many interventions and many species, we know, like, 15 ways to extend
the lifespan in mice or, you know, whatever, and so on.
And this results in, we call it, signatures of longevity.
These are omics, typically, omics patterns that indicate the potential of the system to live long.
We could target these patterns, and therefore, the system would convert it from a shorter length to a longer length.
But here, we study also aging.
Aging is age of the change.
And this can be quantified by, I will show you, some clocks, like epigenic clocks, crotomic clocks, organ-specific clocks, and so on.
It results in actionable biomarkers of aging.
And the third component is rejuvenation.
Rejuvenation is, to me, is the conversion of the older state to a younger state.
So, when you look at the aging, I already told you what aging in my mind is.
And if you kind of think, if you accept that model, the aging would be irreversible.
Because there's a myriad of different processes and modifications and by-products and damaged types,
which cannot really go back.
You cannot just go in the reverse way.
But you could still target biological age and to reduce it.
And I'll also give you some examples.
Therefore, it's also possible to regenerate organism even though aging is irreversible.
And all the way, it allows us to target aging and find interventions.
And we have many projects and we identified many interventions that are known to extend lifespan.
We have a huge transformative project from NIH where we actually have a large scale of mouse studies,
in silico predict new compounds that extend lifespan and test them in mice or lifespan and other features.
We already identified many .
So, now I will give you one example or just one example of the longevity study.
And this is from a paper published in Cell last year.
So, this is experiment matrix of three kind of features.
Blue, longevity.
Red, aging.
Green, interventions that extend lifespan.
Blue brain like kidney, liver.
These are changes associated with longevity across mammals.
And you see they create one another.
If something changes in the brain, typically similar things change in the liver or kidney.
Red is aging.
Aging muscle means muscles of different mammals.
Brain, brain different mammals.
Human means different tissues of human.
Global means different tissues and different species.
They all correlate with one another.
And this is interventions.
This is like a restriction, arachomycin, acancliflozin, acarbose, growth hormone deficiency and so on.
They also correlate with one another.
But when we relate these three features of longevity in aging,
it's very, to us, was really positive actually.
Very striking observation.
Most striking here is that we compare this corner, kind of this dead corner.
There's no correlation of longevity across species with longevity across interventions.
Whatever we study in the lab, as a field, calorie restriction, rapamycin, whatever genetic manipulations, lifestyle changes,
there's no correlation with how nature extends lifestyle.
It's really amazing.
Because the common paradigm, let's go to the whale, find, okay, why does it live long?
Find that gene expressed in the mouse and make the mouse longer live.
And typically it makes the mouse longer live, but maybe 5%, 10%, not 200%.
So there's no correlation.
And to me this represents really an untapped potential of that longevity across mammals.
So to me kind of explanation is this.
So nature changes many pathways, many genes.
It's not a single pathway, single gene that we typically target.
And therefore mechanistically it's also become.
But the point is that all of this, they provide us opportunity to find new interventions, different types.
Type of the longevity across mammals, type of interventions, it can be used.
Anyway, so this is about longevity.
Now about aging.
And in our field, about 10 years ago, a revolution happened.
This was started by Steve Orland, who used to be at UCLA.
Now Daltos Labs, who in 2013 published a paper on the first multi-tissue human epigenetic clock.
Basically it's a tool that predicts biological age of an organism.
And we followed closely and we developed the first mouse clock.
So it will just be one example of our study, but it's kind of conceptually similar.
So this is the actual age of mice.
This is predicted A.
And this is the 16 age groups.
You see what corresponds.
How we do it?
We take mouse blood.
We sequence it by this method called the reduced representation by subline sequencing.
And apply various machine learning approaches to identify a set of CPG sites.
Do you guys know CPG?
Oh, sorry.
Okay.
So DNA, four nucleotides, one of them is C, cytosine.
It can be methylated or not.
And we follow methylation changes with age.
So some cytosines increase methylation with age, some decrease methylation.
Out of the millions of CPG sites, we find a subset that best represent the aging process.
And we have a model.
Each site has a weight in that model.
Together it's like mathematical formula that takes the age.
And this is how it works.
And if we subject mice to calorie restriction, like four age groups here.
You see they are all biologically young.
So in other words, we can quantify easily the effect of interventions that are already known to
that less.
Well, this is an example.
We take adult cells from 10 month old mice.
And we program them to embryonic cells called IVSCs.
Induced peripotent stem cells.
This is the discovery of Yerman Naga.
I think the most important discovery of this century.
Where he was given Nobel Prize very quickly for him.
And he converted them to adult cells to embryonic cells.
But for us, it's a rejuvenation process.
We find that these cells are predicted to be of zero biological age based on the clock that
we have in the blood.
So it does work.
So, but the question is, like I showed you that we train the model based on
ecological.
But in fact, we don't know what's the best way to model.
We could model based on ecological age like here.
We could model based on mortality.
Like time to death.
We could model on age of the diseases.
Or one for decline.
Or damage accumulation.
Or other features.
Like rate of change, for example.
And this, all these biomarkers will quantify age in just a different way.
What is the best way?
Actually, it's unclear.
So, kind of these features represent the best-known clocks.
Like we have order of clocks trained for chronological age.
We have like a green-age clock that's trained more on mortality.
We have .
Clock that is trained for rate of change and so on.
So, for this, you form the consortium called biomarker of aging consortium.
This was really led by who is an instructor in the lab.
And this is the first paper we published.
And it's been really successful.
About 30 leading labs in the field, joint networks.
Initially, this consortium provides a platform for debate and discussion.
And development of new biomarkers.
And it's been quite successful.
So, this website, I want to mention this conference that we'll have next week.
So, of course, you're welcome to join.
And by the way, for a certain category of winner, you will get a free ticket to the aging consortium conference next week.
So, do good.
Yeah, thank you.
So, yeah, last year we had it at the Buck Institute in California.
There was 250 people showed up.
We couldn't accept more because the room was limiting.
This year we have a room at Harvard Medical School which holds 500 people.
So, we expect a full room as well.
And we have representatives of, you know, government organizations, editors, industry, like Big Pharma, whatever, XPRIZE, Revolution, and so on, RPH, New Agency.
They're all the way there.
So, we also have a challenge to predict, to compare biomarkers, aging biomarkers.
And just yesterday, I think there was a piece of insights about our challenge.
Just they kind of described.
Actually, you're the first to see the results.
They will be shown at the conference.
But basically, these are the existing parts.
What we did, we took 500 people from our hospital, MGH, MGB, Mass General Briegel.
500 people, we profiled them for DNA methylation.
We know their ages.
We know who they are.
We know how many of them died.
And they just ask people, okay, tell us, what's the ages?
What's the ages?
How long do they live?
They live because they give blood, and then they lived certain time, and then died some of them.
And these are the three winners.
The actual age is from about 20 to 100 years old.
And this is the particular age you see.
These biomarkers work really, really, very nice.
We had over 500 submissions to the 37 teams qualifying to the final.
And you can see this mean absolute error.
All the top scores are better than existing biomarkers.
Really amazing.
Like just maybe like 2.5 years or so.
And these are some people from the industry.
Some people just kind of credit students.
So I invite you all to compete as well.
So it's the first phase.
Now we will announce the results of the second phase, the prediction of mortality.
This was prediction of chronological age.
So we don't know yet, but we are finalizing the results.
And so we will announce at the conference the winners.
And the winners actually also will give short talks at the end.
Okay.
I, it's a short presentation.
I just want to quickly mention a couple of studies from our lab recently,
which I will not discuss, just mention briefly.
So Albert Ng is a very talented graduate student.
He developed the first causal clock.
Published recently in Nature Aging.
Because the problem is the current biomarkers.
And there are many issues, right?
But one issue is a causality.
So I'll give you one example.
You can predict the age of a person by features like wearing glasses,
using hearing aid, kind of quantifying number of visits to doctors,
using wheelchair, walking cane.
Like take 100 parameters like that.
You can predict roughly the age of a person.
And then you fire all doctors.
Like no doctors.
Like nobody can wear glasses because nobody can,
doctors cannot prescribe it, right?
Based on this example, everybody is young because they don't go to the doctor's office.
Yeah.
But of course it's not.
Say later, at the biological level, changes, there are damaging changes.
Like damage happens during aging.
But organism responds to damage.
We call them adaptive processes.
And this adaptive processes also have age of that structure.
And therefore they end up in the clock.
So the clock in biomarkers is a mixture of different processes.
Neutral, damaging, adaptive.
But they can quantify age.
But we need to use biomarker to also test interventions.
And when we test interventions, it's completely different.
So our intervention is to fire all doctors.
Yeah?
It's wrong for the biomarker, right?
So he developed his first causal clock.
And this clock works specifically with interventions that extend lifespan.
And Andre, who's a physicist, he was able to identify stochastic and regulatory components of aging.
Also really kind of amazing work.
And this was done by comparing single cell and the bulk kind of data.
Let me give you some examples of how we study.
This is work from JC Pagani, a instructor in the lab.
He found that biological age can reversibly change by severe stress.
Like basically under control of stress.
And these biomarkers, like for example,
like a dream age, female age, and so on, increases.
And post-stress, it goes down.
And we described four cases.
Like for example, major surgery, severe COVID-19, pregnancy, and parabiosis.
Like for example, pregnancy.
We find that women in the third trimester, they are biologically older.
And postpartum, their biological age is reduced again to normal.
Or for example, COVID-19, we find that the maximal biological age for people who get to the hospital, to the ICU, to the ventilator.
At that point, the biological age is the highest.
Once they recover, it goes back to normal.
We currently expand this because we have other models like sleep deprivation we study.
We even now study how biological changes, biological age changes during the day.
That's actually a very difficult question.
We're trying to do it.
So they also developed, this is also a paper.
It's unpublished, but it's under review in nature now.
Really amazing .
Alex Tushkovsky, who is an instructor in the lab.
It's a 4,500 mouse sample here, RNA-seq.
So it's kind of a huge data set with all kind of manipulations and change, like accelerated,
accelerated aging, genetically, different logically, and so on.
This is how it works, chronological, actual age, predicted age.
And this is how it works with mortality.
We developed a clock based on future mortality in mice.
Actual data and admitted data.
And this is application to interventions.
Control.
This is lifespanic same interventions.
You see, it works.
And then lifespanic shortening interventions.
Works in both ways.
So it can be used to distinguish, to identify new interventions.
In diseases, it shows that this transcriptomic clock, that in each case of every disease,
has a higher biological age than controls.
So apparently, when we have a disease tissue, it literally becomes older than other tissues.
Let me give you two quick examples of rejuvenation.
This is Wodan Babohan Zain, who's at that time, he was a great student,
now he stays as a postdoc.
He used the model of parabiosis.
We take a mouse, old mouse and young mouse.
We sew them together, so they have joint circulation.
They exchange blood.
And keep them for three months.
After three months, we separate them.
Wait for another two months.
And then wait until they die.
We basically find that after three months, old mouse is rejuvenated.
It dramatically decreases biological age.
We wait two months.
It's still, the effect remains, still younger.
And then eventually it lives longer as well than control.
So this is actually one of the most robust examples of rejuvenation.
We can rejuvenate animals.
But in this case, of course, very extreme.
When we connect mice, you know, like that.
Another example of rejuvenation shown here.
This was done by, well, first it was conceptual paper,
but then experimentally it was done by and Alex .
We found the first natural example of rejuvenation.
So when life begins here, we have a zygote.
Zygote is a fertilized egg.
We have an egg fertilized with sperm that's called zygote.
But interestingly, the biological age of the zygote is not zero.
It's slow but not zero.
And then initially it stays the same and then drops here.
We call it ground zero state.
And that's where we think aging begins.
When you ask a question like various researches in the field,
when does aging begin?
Most people say after completion of development
or maybe when at the age of puberty or the age of immunomodality
or when an organism is born.
We find that aging begins here.
But in humans, about three weeks post-fertilization, post-conception.
So we actually think that actually the organismal life also begins here.
So this phase is a phase of preparation for organismal life.
When you have a cell, it just divides all cleavage into multiple cells.
It kind of extends telomeres, you know, clears damage, you know,
prepares other ways, also diffuses methylation, remethylates.
And that's when it's ready to go, it goes.
Like it makes a germline, organogenesis begins.
It's all here.
That's when aging begins.
But we think so.
I would say it's still a hypothesis because it has so far
has only been demonstrated in our lab.
We really wait for somebody to validate it.
We publish this in mice, in like at the bulk clock, single cell clock,
in humans.
There's a paper on frogs.
But, you know, it's possible that we make some mistake here.
I don't know yet.
But I think, you know, it would be interesting to test.
The main point is that this is the first natural example of regionation.
And we don't know mechanistically how it happens.
That's what.
How do you know that it happens?
What?
How do you know that it happens?
Because we quantified these other biomarkers.
Ah, okay.
So we used, first we used like bar epigenetic clocks, like a Horwath clock like
Grim H and so on.
And then we developed a single cell gene methylation clock.
It's a probabilistic clock, completely different.
This was an aging paper.
So also found the same.
Okay.
And when we apply now to scriptomic clock, also shows the same.
In each case, also the timing is the same.
And also, just conceptually, it makes sense.
Because the germline, it ages in organisms.
Like the sperm from an older man is older from a younger man, right?
Ocides from the older woman are older from a younger woman.
And then, when you psychotis form, you know, the age does not disappear, right?
There's damage is there.
So conceptually, I was thinking, it must be rejuvenated.
It must happen.
It's just for some reason, I don't know why, nobody paid attention to it.
Like, everybody assumes psychotis form, life begins, that means it's just a zero.
But I don't understand.
Like, you have the most differentiated cells.
Like, sperm on our side.
The most differentiated.
Now they feel, suddenly everybody calls it the least differentiated.
It's like, well, it makes no sense.
So if you look at all these books, development of biology, I think it's all wrong.
At least at that point.
So I think this stage of differentiation, you prepare for organismal life.
And organismal life and aging, they begin at the same time.
What is the name of this stage, which is in the bottom?
Gastroation.
Gastroation.
Gastroation.
Gastroation.
Gastroation.
Yeah.
I have one more topic.
Yeah, totally.
Go for it.
Yeah.
We're joining this class.
Okay.
So one topic.
Just got accepted.
We're going to share a video.
We always discuss, like, we tell, okay, how old are you?
40 or 20, huh?
Okay.
But we always tell, like, a biological age of an organism.
But in fact, organism is composed of different parts.
And there are different classes potentially in different parts of the organism, right?
So, and last December, it was a really amazing paper from Tony Viscaray, he is at Stanford,
who developed first organ-specific biomarkers.
And technically, it wasn't that great because they didn't work that well.
But conceptually, it was really amazing.
It really was one of the more important things.
And, but we had access to better data sets.
We use UK Biobank, which is an amazing data set with 53,000 retomic profiles in plasma.
This is work done by who is a postdoc in the lab.
This is the clock that he developed, biological age versus predicted age, based on the plasma
retomic profile.
Like, we have plasma in the blood.
Plasma is, like, part of the blood.
You have cells and plasma in the blood, yeah?
And this is a clock based on future mortality, also, because many people died in their cohort.
And then, what we did, we find, okay, what is plasma?
Plasma is composed of proteins metabolites.
They come from different parts of the body.
Like, maybe we find a hundred proteins in the plasma, they come from the brain.
They are made in the brain, secreted, and found in the plasma.
If you build biomarker based on hundred, these hundred proteins, we can predict the age of
the brain in the same way.
Like, another hundred proteins from the liver, we can predict the age of the liver.
So, we profile plasma, and we can tell the age of different parts of the body, right?
And so, we have these clocks now.
Liver clock, brain clock, artery clocks, whatever, intestinal clock, kidney, and so on, yeah?
These are proteins that come, like, from the lung.
In the plasma, we profile them, we tell how old is the lung.
And then, we can tell in the same organism, what is the age of different organs, this way.
Okay?
And these residuals show this chronological model, mortality model.
These are residuals.
You can see there's a strong correlation.
This means, like, if somebody is old in the brain, also old, like, in the artery, you know,
in the liver, in the lung.
It makes sense, right?
Chronologically, and also in terms of mortality.
So, sometimes, like, things like artery and local, local age is like an age that we predict
based on locomotor activity, also.
There is another way to predict it.
But, in general, yes, kind of good correspondence.
Now, when we use these clocks, we could, we find amazingly we can study diseases.
For example, we can use this clock, lung clock.
Proteins go from the lung to plasma.
We profile, we tell the age of the lung, right?
We say, which diseases are predicted?
COPD.
COPD is a lung disease.
So, lung clock best predicts COPD.
We take liver clock, the first disease is liver cirrhosis.
If you take, like, brain clock, we predict dementia.
So, it's really amazing.
And then, we have this clustering of different clocks and diseases.
Like, COPD, like, people with COPD is lung disease.
This is the age in the organs.
The oldest is lung.
Dementia, people with dementia, oldest in the brain, and so on.
But, also, there's a cluster of, like, metabolic diseases in different, different diseases in different organs.
So, this is a, you really have many practical applications.
For example, hope nobody smokes here.
I don't know, but nobody smokes here.
I know.
Smoking is better.
So, but, which organs are affected?
Because now we have different organs, and you look for people who smoke.
It's bad for all organs, right?
But, the worst is for the lung.
Not surprising.
But, of course, we see negative, there's no positive effect.
Smoking doesn't show any positive effect to any organ.
Only negative.
What's conventional?
What?
What's conventional?
It's a conventional plaque.
It's combining them all.
Okay.
Yeah.
So, how about drinking?
Does anybody drink wine?
Nobody?
Okay.
So, it's more complicated.
So, we find, okay, what organs are affected?
Like, we find kidney, for example, intestinal aging is particularly worse, yeah?
Right.
But, then we find there's a positive death, like, in the lung and artery.
So, interesting.
So, another way to look at this is like this.
Just another example.
Let's look at the associations of foods with arterial aging.
Just artery.
Artery means proteins made in the artery go to the plasma.
We profile them.
We tell the age of the artery, right?
Wine is good.
Yogurt is bad.
Yeah?
So, if somebody has accelerated aging in the artery, they may benefit by drinking wine.
And, they may benefit by not eating yogurt.
Yeah?
But, if you look at the same foods, only intestinal aging model, it's the same people, right?
Only now we have artery versus intestinal.
It's the opposite.
Wine is bad.
Yogurt is good.
So, what we think is that we should stop, not stop, but we should think, taking consideration,
looking for interventions that work in a personalized way.
We need to know who can benefit from this intervention because we all age in different ways.
We can quantify it and we can tell, we cannot tell, but in the future we should be able to
tell who can benefit from which intervention.
Yeah?
Like calorie restriction.
It's known, it's really helpful, but it will not benefit everybody.
We need to know who can benefit based on the aging pattern.
In other words, with asynchrony organ aging, we may target these weak links, organs with
accelerated aging within the body by developing interventions.
So, our model is like this.
Zygote.
Remember, Zygote, that's a fertilized egg.
It begins here, crime zero, three weeks in humans.
And then organs, the systems, they age, but then some systems, they age more.
But this is not simply an age state, because they age non-autonomously, right?
They interact with other organs.
So, in a way, their age is decreased, pulled back by other systems.
So, it's not just older, but it's also altered.
And we don't know yet how to describe that state.
This one is, it's our model still.
And often in the field, there's a question, like, is Asian disease?
That's actually, there's a content papers with that title, right?
And there's always, like, a movement to classify aging as disease so that it can be targeted.
We actually had a paper, now, already eight years ago, saying that the question is wrong.
We cannot really say, we cannot say, we basically said aging is not a disease and not a disease.
But then we can say, we cannot reverse the question now and ask the question,
is chronic disease a manifestation of aging?
And based on what I told you, we suggest, basically, a new model that links together aging and diseases,
but basically saying that disease may be used as a systems or subsystem aging,
or maybe, like, pockets of non-autonomous aging.
In other words, we say there are no diseases.
It's just the different parts of the organism, like systems, subsystems,
it could be at different scales, could be organ, could be individual cell, could be one gene.
They age.
And that age altered state is we call a disease.
So I think it's a way to bring together aging and diseases.
And maybe in the future, this could help to target them.
That's basically all I could tell you.
I will quickly say, just to summarize, so do you remember what we discussed?
We discussed the longevity signatures, growth species, cells and interventions.
These are basically all mixed patterns that indicate the potential to the system to live long or short.
And there is an amazing difference between species longevity and non-interventions.
We also discussed biomarkers a lot.
The bulk, single cell level, causal, tissue, multi-tissue.
Also, different omics modalities like .
I told you about reversible changes in biological age, a few examples.
And also, I told you about biomarker patient consortium, also challenge.
We also discussed rejuvenation.
I showed you three examples, actually.
Cellular programming I mentioned, heterocardic barbiosis.
And I also mentioned this ground zero model of rejuvenation.
And finally, organ-specific aging.
There are organ models that can be trained for chronological age and mortality.
And also, association with diseases and diets and new ideas about whether the relationship
between aging and disease.
But altogether, all we do is try to understand and target aging, longevity and rejuvenation.
So, this is a very difficult problem.
I feel like we are still at the very beginning.
Because when you start studying aging, almost there's no barrier.
We all see aging every day.
So, you start and you feel you already understand.
You become like an expert.
But the more you study, the more difficult it becomes.
Even these biomarkers are very clear.
Like, okay, we have initial biomarkers.
The more we study, the more problems.
The elasticity, causality, you know, cost, adaptation.
This kind of different scale that we have.
All these challenges that still need to be solved.
And we need people to do it.
That's what I'm hoping comes out of us.
Yes.
So, this is the current lab.
Basically, in the lab members.
The former lab members.
And collaborations.
Collaborations and funding sources.
So, I love that.
Yeah.
That's kind of cool.
They go back in age.
Yep.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Do you have time for questions?
Yeah.
First of all, let's give it up.
Thank you so much.
I know Elena was very kind to share what we're doing today.
I do want to let other people ask questions because I'm sure there are.
But I have one very specific thing to ask you.
If you have a moment.
I've been very interested in sort of the way computational systems perceive and measure time from an infotheoretic perspective.
So, if you think about the brain, for instance, there are certain substances you can give the brain where it's going to perceive time a little slower faster.
Right?
So, you know, if you take caffeine or if you're sleep deprived, all these different things can sort of change, you know, your experience of the compression of time.
And I've often, for a very, very long time, pun intended, wondered, you know, is there an analog of that for the body?
And I wonder for the rest of the body and, you know, other organs.
And I wonder if we were to measure in the brain that if the brain was perceiving time slower, was it aging at a different rate?
And would that then be applicable for the rest of the body and other organs?
Because I also know like in a lot of, you know, longevity science, it's sort of this idea of tricking the body to a certain state.
Right?
We have fasting, you know, memetics like rapamycin and all that.
And I'm wondering, has there been any research into this sort of experimental idea?
Just picking your brain.
That's a difficult question because it's difficult to define time.
Yeah.
I know yesterday Stephen Wolfgang was here.
Yes.
And I was reading, a couple of weeks ago, I was reading his paper that was on time, right?
What is time?
It's an incredibly difficult concept.
Time also, how time is perceived.
I'm not an expert here to answer this.
Just because we, like in my life, I try to bring like physicists, mathematicians that come and help them for example.
So we discuss and we publish a few physical papers, but I don't know.
I don't know the many of your questions because this will be honest answer, right?
So we don't know.
We have models, right?
We can test these models, but we cannot explain anything.
Yeah.
Okay.
Any other questions?
Anybody?
First.
My question is on these slides related to, let's say, the effects of smoking or the effects of certain foods.
I believe that the units there were something like this increases your age by maybe 0.07 or 0.0004.
Is there a way to understand that more intuitively?
Like maybe it ages you by your lungs by 10 years or brings you 30% closer to cancer?
But potentially it can be converted, but we would just need to be able to do it before we're done.
Okay.
So I mean, this is the first, the data set become available less than a year ago.
So it was really a new study.
Currently we are expanding on it because there can be many, many phenotypes to be studied.
We initially wanted to do it just a conceptually way.
And actually I would say even that the examples that are presented, it seems to be viewed as a conceptual example.
We cannot be for sure, we don't know for sure like the effect of the alcohol, for example, or smoking.
These are associations.
There's, you know, it's for presentation purposes, I would say.
More or less.
But conceptually, I think it's definitely like the effect, like the actual effect, we cannot be 100% sure.
But also in terms of the number of years of this effect.
I did want to add to that and ask about, you know, the whole hormesis thing, right, in terms of stresses.
I know there was stuff about, you know, alcohol, for instance, about it could be something like a hormetic stressor,
and just the right amount.
I know Sinclair used to talk about that with the resveratural thing.
And I'm wondering, like, what could explain why there's sort of a disparity of agreement on whether that has any tangible effect on longevity?
Because, I mean, if you look online, I'm sure you've seen how many different people have opinions on this.
And I wonder what efforts are being taken to make that understanding less ambiguous.
Well, hormesis may be understood as mild stress.
To me, it's a degree of stress.
I assure you that severe stress increases biological age.
Mild stress may be beneficial.
There's a product who says, like, something that doesn't...
Or doesn't really make sense.
So, it's because there are adaptive processes in the cells or in the organism, right?
So, you stress an organic response by activating the protective system.
And actually, we see this also when we compare, like, old-leaved species.
No, no, no, no, long-leaved species.
No, no, no, long-leaved species.
So, for example, we find when we compare, trying to relate, omics patterns, age of aging and long-leaved species,
we find they're slightly related.
So, basically, this means that long-leaved organisms, like whales and humans, they are older, you know, at the same kind of age than mice.
But why would they be?
But I think they are just better protected.
So, when this same protection is achieved also, it happens during aging, in long-leaved species,
and basically, also, maybe related to Hermesis, which is a mild stress.
Another example, though, we have studied sleep deprivation.
And there's a lot of data in the literature on sleep deprivation.
They study it kind of negatively.
We look at our clocks.
We actually find that sometimes there is no effect.
Sometimes you can slight rejuvenation.
Yeah.
It makes no sense.
Yeah, I've read that.
But if you do this, like the longest deprivation, like instead of just one day, like in minus five days,
then we see increased biological age, which is also reversible.
It's really, this whole thing is sort of interesting because, you know, then I also think of, like, senescent cells, right,
and this idea that they could potentially be harmful.
They could, I mean, in a way, could that be like a self-induced stress that then sort of forces your body to respond to that, like, hormetic?
Right?
Is there, are there certain mechanisms in either humans or other organisms that we can learn from where there's sort of self-induced stresses that act as like a hormetic stress,
a reminder of what the body should be going afterwards?
Because it's like they do if you don't use it, you lose it type of thing.
And I wonder, are there ways of creating these very controlled damages in a body and getting it to sort of do that automatically and it sort of keeps the thing going to a degree?
Does that make me...?
Because senescent cells are a stress.
Sure.
Yeah.
Yeah, there's a fine line between, like, mild stress and serious stress.
We've been discussing these models, for example, like, maybe related, I think it may be related, for example, called damage vaccine.
Yeah.
Right?
Can we actually vaccinate an organism by introducing certain types of damage?
Yeah.
These are, like, valid approaches, but experimentally, not easy to design experiments.
But potentially, you might be right.
It may be possible.
I would get cold.
Sorry for running.
Anybody else have any other questions?
Yeah.
Great talk.
I have a lot of questions.
I'm going to try to merge a few of them.
The clocks you were using for the organ-specific, those were, that was protein and serum and plasma from the UK Biobank and, like, protein for, like, let's say, liver would be all ASD and then whatever others.
It wasn't methylation, right?
It was levels of proteins.
Changes in protein levels.
Specific proteins that would be relevant to that organ type.
So, you know, we first look at the gene expression and we find which organ expresses which gene.
Okay.
And because we detect them in plasma, we infer that they are secreted from that organ and go to plasma.
And if you focus just on these proteins in the plasma and develop a model, like aging model for them, for these proteins, then we can predict biological age of that organ.
Yeah.
That's how it works.
But it's all based on protein levels.
Yeah.
So, okay.
My second question is going to be, you mentioned that these epigenetic clocks seem to change based on time of day.
Like, they can fluctuate right then and, you know, proteins in your body can do that as well.
And I'm thinking about the circadian element of, depending on the organ type, some of those may fluctuate more on time of day or maybe diurnal, right?
Like a thymus or any sort of hormonal changes that would go on throughout the day.
Those would have particular fluctuations.
So I wonder, I mean, I'm sure that can easily be controlled for it, but I wonder how much, which organs would be most plastic in that.
There are no good datasets for it.
There are no good datasets for it.
We studied this at other levels, other modalities.
But we don't have an answer yet.
It's ongoing project in the lab.
But it's really hustling.
So, for example, you would think that after sleep, you're sleeping, you wake up, you should be, you know, kind of the youngest, right?
We can remove damage accumulated.
But then if you look, for example, at chance of dying, the highest chance of dying is in the afternoon, not in the evening, not at night.
So we wake up and then we, like, leave for a few hours and then we're at the peak of dying at that point.
So why?
Like, and then also diseases, like, you know, we look at the incident of heart attack or stroke, but also the peak also at that stage.
Yeah.
So, but, but, but we have these fluctuations, like we're trading cycles, right?
So the afternoon sort of window of, you know, everyone politically knows just like, oh, you feel sort of sleepy around that time.
I don't know if that's exactly.
But it's an effect of food.
I think after we, we might also age when we eat.
Sure, sure.
When we eat it after we eat.
That makes sense.
I mean, I was trying to, you know, and initially I told you about the model.
We always use that model.
So in a simple way, we can view this as, as a level of damage, in a simplest way, yeah?
And so, for example, under severe stress like disease, this damage accumulates.
Once the stress is relieved, damage can be exported, yeah?
Yeah.
And then we become younger.
In the same way, they like work hard on your project hackathon, you become older, and then
you kind of sleep, you know, and you become younger again.
So it kind of fluctuates.
But this idea of fluctuation in biological age, constant fluctuation, is not, it's a very
new concept.
You know, I don't think, I think if we present it to the aging community, I don't think it
will be easily accepted yet.
Because some people think of aging something if it's like only happens like a long term.
Sure.
Sure.
But it's a very interesting kind of, we actually don't know how exactly to, like last weekend,
I spent my whole weekend making selfies of myself every 15 minutes.
And then we predict the age and how it changes during the day.
Your smiles slowly disappear.
Yeah.
No, I try like to be like, same, same, like a wide background, like same life.
Yeah.
It's something constantly the whole day.
Because there was no good data sets, you know.
Yeah, but this is just one way to do it, yeah.
So you said that when we're exposed to stress, we age and then when we relax, we eat, or like
when we like get ourselves out of that stress, we go back to our age.
So does it fluctuate and gets back to the same baseline, or is it like it's only recent?
There is a bit of the clocks.
It's not good enough for us to tell whether the organ goes back exactly to the same baseline or not.
I often get these questions when I discuss pregnancy, for example.
Because pregnancy is, it's an increased metabolic stress, like on the woman's body.
And actually this also can be observed, like gestational diabetes, incidence of heart disease.
They all can relate, like third trimester is older.
But then, I'm asked sometimes, but you have a fetus, right?
So there's also kind of, in effect, there's a parabiosis.
So maybe a mother could benefit from a fetus because fetus is young.
Or maybe the fetus is taking all of the...
Yeah, well...
Vitamins, all of the essentials from the...
That's why she ages and then it's out of her weight.
It may be.
And maybe we don't know.
But again, so I think we need better data sets to quantify.
We are not really sure.
We know it personally goes back to normal.
But, you know, maybe it's a little bit higher, a little bit lower.
We don't know.
And how do you think you can measure that?
Well, with larger data sets.
Like for pregnancy, you know, we have mice.
We collect blood.
We make pregnant and collect blood before and during pregnancy up to postpartum.
In humans, we go with data sets which are available.
But it's typically smaller data sets because we need longitudinal.
We need, like, blood from, say, women, like, before they are pregnant and then during pregnancy.
Typically, data sets like, you know, 20 women, 50 women, just more than that.
We need, like, 1,000 of these.
I have a few questions.
So, when it comes to muscle breaking, I want to understand, like, how does it impact the
biological problem?
Like, when you're working out.
Working out?
Working out.
Right?
Is it on a muscle breaking rate?
So, how does it impact the biological problem?
We haven't studied this.
We don't know.
We know the effect of exercise and generally positive.
But how exactly, like, during exercise, it changes, we don't know.
Post-exercise, like, I want to understand, like, the biological problem of the muscle.
Before exercise, in post-exercise
Yeah.
We haven't studied this.
So, we don't know.
But I think it's possible.
I'm sure there are data sets out there that can be studied with existing blocks.
And one more question I had is the temperature of the volume.
So, like, this is
Very good point, yeah.
I don't know.
Like, the temperature
So, this is, like, very intuitive understanding for me.
But it's, like, I'm trying to understand if you
If the temperature of the organ is warmer
Suppose the heart has a warmer temperature than your gut brain.
Is it possible to see that the heart
I don't know
Is older in biological blood than the gut?
So, I would think at that level, there's probably an adjustment in the rate.
Right?
So, organs develop, you know, not at the same rate.
So, for example, like, neurons, they develop earlier.
But the reproductive system develops later.
And then
But also, ages faster.
That's why I think we have this traumatic change in fertility, like, menopause and so on.
That's what we observe.
But then
We more think in terms of the differences in the organ temperatures over time.
Like, for example, in response to some stresses or environmental conditions or historical periods.
For example, like, one of the ideas that we explored in the lab
Like, now we
People live longer.
Right?
And when you visually look at people like 70-year-old people, they look like previously 60-year-old people.
Very little young.
But when you look at younger people, it's opposite.
So, meaning that
For example, if you look at the age of puberty, like menarche.
Menarche over the last hundred years decreased maybe three to four years.
And also, in boys as well.
And if you look at, like, age of teeth replacement or bone growth.
It seems like they're developing faster but living longer.
Why?
It can identify factors that
And one factor, I think, is temperature.
So, if you look at, like, hundred years ago, look at temperatures.
The normal temperature was 37 degrees.
Now it's 36.6.
We decrease the temperature.
So, maybe this could be one factor.
But this is a hypothesis.
Right?
So, I think temperature is very critical.
Actually, we have a project on temperature in the lab.
On the exposed mice, different temperatures.
And then see how they perform later.
And we also go to the hospital to the
When children are prematurely born, they are placed in incubators.
And for some reason, at different temperatures.
It depends on the nurse.
Some nurse prefer that temperature, that temperature.
And we can follow them.
We currently doing that.
I feel like whenever the body reaches a warm state.
Like, it's just so intuitive.
Okay.
Thank you.
I'm sorry.
Are you smoking or drinking?
The body gets warmer.
Do you think, like, warm, like, increasing warm temperatures?
Why you aren't going to take it down?
I mean, this is just simple.
In a long term, I think, being warm, it would be bad.
Right?
So, because they accelerate all the processes.
But at the same time, becoming warm also, activate protective system, adaptive systems.
So, at least initially, I'm not sure what it would be necessarily.
I don't think it might necessarily be .
So, yeah.
I think so.
In some countries, they may age a slightly different rate currently.
But based on many factors, right?
Genetic factors could be environmental factors.
Could be, you know, a rate of infections.
Like, you know, they just, you know, sanitary conditions make them, you know, get infected all the time.
They have higher temperature.
And it just happens many times.
And therefore, they age faster.
Even then.
So, at the end, you get sick.
Do you age more?
We don't know.
I mean, this is always very, very new, right?
So, this biomarker, the first biomarker was developed 10 years ago.
And we're still debating which biomarker, like, to use, how to construct.
And, you know, we applied some levels.
But there's a, we're just beginning here.
Like, I encourage you all, like, to join us.
And you can apply all these biomarkers, develop better markets.
So, there's all these questions.
Most of the questions that, like, it's all very good questions.
Just nobody has done it here.
All right.
So, my question is, where did, like, the first born, it seemed like you talked about the enzyme damage.
In the beginning, why does this damage only manifest itself at older age?
Like, from the early age, from your baby to, like, I don't know, 25, 30, whatever.
You seem to be getting stronger and more powerful and bigger also.
But then, all of a sudden, you're starting to decline.
What causes this decline to start happening all of a sudden?
But it's not a sudden process of decline.
It's a continuous process.
For example, if you look at incidence of diseases or mortality,
like some integrated parameters like that, they just consistently go.
So, just damage accumulates over time.
And eventually, it results in manifestations that we see.
Right?
Functional decline, diseases, and death, whatever.
I think more interesting is what happens during development.
Because there is really battling patterns, actually.
So, for example, newborn children, they are equally likely to die as a 60-year-old person.
It's quite high mortality rate initially.
And then drops immediately.
And the minimal mortality in humans, can you predict?
Can anybody guess?
30?
30?
30?
Mineral mortality?
Nine.
At nine years old.
And it's kind of puzzling.
Why nine?
It's just not related to anything, right?
Before puberty.
So, we think it's an overlap of two processes.
One is aging, that we observe later.
Initially, mortality is very low because of aging.
But initially, mortality is high due to development processes.
So, it's initially high.
Actually, it's highest even during pregnancy, right?
Fetal development, embryonic, and it kind of drops.
And then it becomes minimal at nine simply because it's just one process goes down and one goes up.
There's nothing special about it in that sense.
One other quick thing to interject.
In terms of the way temperature and thermodynamics could affect the material, like the actual physical material properties of an organ.
Have we found if there's anything between if an organ is not in terms of getting some type of damage or anything, but like do bones age at a different rate in a very noticeable way compared to softer organs?
Because I also think in terms of plasticity and adaptability, it's sort of interesting that like, as far as I know, that every organism that I've understood that I know, it seems that anything that acts like a brain or a nervous system is basically always soft and squishy.
And skeletal systems are sort of always by definition somewhat harder.
And I'm wondering why that pattern emerges and what that says about aging at all.
No, somehow, or within the organism, there's a coordinated somewhat at some level coordination between organs in terms of aging.
There are some of ours already mentioned reproductive system.
Maybe that's the main.
I think it is faster.
Some cells, like for example, like in the muscle, some dimension muscle, we find that muscle stem cells, they age much slower.
So, but not all stem cells.
Some other, not basic stem cells like age, like with rate equal to organism of aging, but some stem cells age slower.
Yeah.
What I meant to say was like the actual like material properties.
Is there something about the hardness and sort of that underlying structure of, you know, an organ, a cell or whatever that seems to have an effect on the rate at which it ages?
Because in a sense, it's like if something is highly plastic, then it seems like it would be able to better adapt to things.
Right.
But then also if something is is harder and it's colder, things are more packed together in that way.
So sort of thermodynamically is that also aging at a slower rate.
And I think that's also part of like this, this whole like cryogenics, I think is what they call it about.
You know, there's, there are these ideas that if you, if you slow down, if you, if you freeze something enough to an optimal temperature,
it's almost like it's experiencing from its perspective, from its cellular computational perspective, it's experiencing less time because it just has less to do.
Right. And then, and then there's less chance of something screwing it up.
Perhaps.
Okay.
All right.
Actually, go for it.
I think when you're talking about cryogenics, that actually doesn't, doesn't that essentially mean you're doing, you're, you're going through less metabolic processes.
Yes.
Which means you're accumulating less damage.
I think both are carbonated species.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
You're just good fun.
Yeah.
If you stay outside.
Yeah.
If you're a bear.
This, in biology, biology is very, very complex.
Like hibernation.
I actually study hibernation.
I visited a year ago, I was in Alaska at the Institute of Arctic Biology, and they study hibernation,
Arctic ground squirrels, bears, and so on.
And what is interesting is Arctic ground squirrels, they hibernate for like nine months.
But every like three weeks, they wake up.
Like their temperature goes initially during hibernation all the way to lower like to zero.
Okay.
They'll freeze, but they keep zero.
And then every three weeks, it goes to normal, like 37.
Like for one day, it just goes back.
And I asked them, like, why do you think they kind of warm up every three weeks?
The answer to sleep.
So hibernation is very different from sleep and from torpor.
So it's really just metabolic suppression.
So in that sense, it does preserve, like slows down, but the damage accumulates and they still
need like sleep to get rid of that damage.
That also reminds me, have you heard of this thing called cessation before?
C-E-S-S-A-T-I-O-N?
Cessation of what?
Well, it was actually something from cognitive science.
There was this guy, Ruben Lauponen, and he was studying these very advanced meditators.
I promise you this is more grounded than it seems.
That would practice these certain things for very, very long times.
And it would seem that they were able to sort of slow down their metabolic rate to the point
that it seems like they say their consciousness, quote unquote, reached cessation.
And it was like ceased to be there and they didn't experience things or whatever.
And I think there's some sort of theorizing in that paper about this was some type of cognitive hibernation almost.
And that perhaps the brain was actually aging differently because it was experiencing less.
I would say it's more related to torpor, not to hibernation.
Yeah.
Torpor is the state that in humans cannot be normally achieved, but like in many species, it can be like bats, for example.
They experience it every day, even in mice, can be used in mice in some other species.
Thank you.
Anybody have any other questions?
Thank you very much.
One more.
All right.
Last question.
So I'm trying to like figure out like how like cellular automatic fractal expansion.
What is your question?
Fractal expansion?
Fractal expansion?
Mm-hm.
I'm trying to like associate fractal expansion with electric potential.
So my thing about Lou, Lou and others said, because it's like everybody shares the same knowledge.
And we said, she had the same knowledge of the incident.
I'm sorry for one question.
Is there a brief ask for the question?
Yeah.
She works with my data.
I think it's in that direction.
All right, thank you so much.
Yeah.
It's a pleasure.
Thank you.
Thank you.
