Hello everyone, first of all my name is Almog and I really like to think about thinking.
So today we will think about thinking and actually we will think together collectively
with those that are not here and those that are here because that presentation is a compilation
of discussions that I had during the hackathon with different folks and I've heard some question
that was about your project, right? What's the goal of having some more explicit language,
right? So I made an executive decision to change and remove one of the last slides of my presentation
because what you have made is directly connected to what I will talk about today, okay? So
stay tuned. So first of all, if you want to build bridge between minds, we need to remember
that we are similar but also different. So it's not obvious that we can understand what
the other means. And from the conversations I had with Joshua Bach, and so he mentioned
the different way he had to parse the world in order to navigate that. And others that have
been different challenges along these lines. So let's talk about the obvious. We can share
meaning by communicating with words or other stuff or let's say words. And we can receive words
and interpret meaning. So far so good. So we have meaning, some mushy stuff, compress it to something
that we can deliver, then the person unpacks that, then ta-da! We kind of have shared understanding.
That's so fun. That's so easy, right? And now it becomes more complex, right? Because we can compose
multiple meanings in one message, right? For example, the sesame plate is burned may imply every single
sesame particle is burned, right? So you need to kind of unpack a lot of stuff. You need to do a lot of steps,
a lot of parsing, a lot of la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la. And we call that compositionality. This is a property
of natural language. Now, some messages may have multiple possible interpretations. For instance,
you don't, so you don't, so you don't, so you don't want the, no. When the friend says no, what do they
mean? It can mean different stuff. So you may say, oh, I think it's more likely that that's the case.
Oh, I think it's more likely that that's the case. We may have different buyers. Let's say that I was
sitting in ourselves and we may make decisions according to them. So let's acknowledge that we have
different buyers. Let's talk about more obvious stuff. One, our mind interprets words into meaning in
different ways that others are doing. So just to make sure, is that clear so far? Yes? Yes. Yes. Great. So the
answer is non-obvious. It's non-trivial task. Why? We are different. And some people may have
different assigned meaning to what we talk about. For instance, do you have a bottle? Is that
full? Yeah. Can I have the blue one? Just try to.
Long demonstration. No, really. You're about to do a magic trick. Well, think about that,
right? Because, I mean, when we see this photo and we have the, I think, thanks for the blue one. So can
you bring me the blue one? I just asked for the blue one and you gave me the bottle. And actually, we have, I
didn't expect it. Anyways, to the point, we can choose between warnings. It will be more explicit. So
someone will be able to parse what we want to say more easily, right? Great. Now, when people
try to think about how they can do computational models that will help to choose the right wording,
one of the suggestions of the RSA, the rational speech app model, basically, you could see the
following scenario, okay? You have a speaker and you have a listener. Let's denote speaker. Speaker and
listener as L, okay? Now, they look at this thing and the person saying, my friend had glasses. Do you
have an idea which one of them? Not so far, but then the listener thinks, okay, she says glasses, but if she
says glasses, it would mean these two, but if she would say a hat, it would mean that one. So why
didn't she say a hat, the friend with a hat? So if she chose to say with the glasses, probably,
hmm, maybe, maybe it's that one. Okay? So there's some process there of trying to infer what the other
person is trying to convey by simulating in our mind what they are thinking, if it makes sense. So it's thinking about the
thinking of the other person. And that's one model that tries to explain that. Now, the really non-obvious is
that people see the world differently. And let's say, imagine a scenario where you have a kid and a
mom, okay? And the mom is looking at the bottle of the kid coming back from school and she says, you
didn't drink anything. You didn't drink. You didn't drink at all. No, I drank water. What do you mean? You didn't drink at all.
But look, it's like almost empty. No, but you didn't drink at all. So what's going on? So basically
if the water level, let's say, is at hell, the literal interpretation of you didn't drink at all would be
there will be cognitive dissonance. It would say, I, I, you know, right? It's, I drank. So, but if you kind of
understand your mom, right? As a kid that's six years old or so, kind of saying, okay, you know, I
think she means that she wants, she wants this to be empty because only when it's empty. So it'd be good, right?
It's, it's so complex and essential, but we're still doing so. So that's beautiful. So let's, let's put some
on grass because why not? So the literal interpretation would be when it's full, um, uh, when it's full, when, when, when, when, when you
hear if you didn't drink at all, it means that, um, it's full. There. But if you are kind of taking into account the way mom is
simulating the wall and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, let's call it cognitive biases, then you may say, when
you hear, uh, didn't drink at all, you will consider all these possible, um, heights as you didn't drink at all. So, well, kind of
inferring the other subjective meaning. Now, the super non-obvious connecting it to the conversation with, uh, Joshua
that, um, that just think about autism for a second and where, where the implicit is unclear. And now you
kind of get it why the explicit language can be useful. So when it's hard to understand the implicit, you may
just look at this thing and here you didn't drink at all and you're just like, what? But I drank and you just, there is
cognitive dissonance because there is one, one belief of what you see and then you hear this sentence and it means
something else and you just, there is, um, cognitive dissonance. So, basically, I see what you have proposed as
something that is inherently connected to here because you're saying, hey, I would factorize implicit sentences into something
super explicit. So, it will be easier for us to, uh, common language with machines. But what if we
will have some translator that will take the implicit language of the everyday and will make it easier for
those who are challenged with, uh, taking the implicit, uh, to be aware of the explicit that is behind the scenes. So, I would, I would give you a
applause because like, I think, I think, um, because I was, I was, uh, thank you for that. So, basically, uh, that's the kind of
recap of the discussions I had around. And, uh, thank you so much for having this hackathon. Thank you for the
discussions. Thank you for everything. So, thank you so much.
All right. Any questions?
First question.
Good question, guys.
Right. It's like, you know, I have, I can have an apple here, I can have an orange here, not much of a distance,
right? In terms of identifying them because of that shared invariance between them. Then, you know, you have an
apple, uh, maybe you have, um, you know, a golf ball, right? So, there's going to be, there's a bit more of a distance
between them. It gets more abstract. And then, if you go from an apple to, you know, a camera, what is still sort of, in terms of
things like category theory, what's the actual connection? I'm just wondering if you've thought
about that in terms of, of language and perception and how we reduce uncertainty. Because it's, you know,
I noticed this even just in daily life, like we misunderstand things all the time.
Oh, yeah, yeah. So, I mean, I do have an answer for that. Okay. It comes from the kind of the psychology
literature and specifically with, uh, uh, Carl Rogers and so that talked about different stuff, including the, um,
concept of, uh, uh, I think accuracy makes sense. It's, it's a process where you have, um,
two images, right? And you are one person and then you have another person and you're talking. Yeah.
You're exchanging information. Now, you may say, oh, yeah, imagine a house. Then both of you have some, something.
Then, ah, and, uh, there is, uh, entrance. I want the entrance to be, uh, from that area and I want to have a garden. Um, I don't know.
Why don't you make person? Anyways. And then you put your, your stuff here. So, you, you talk, but you perceive.
Yeah. You represent it differently. So, the process of empathic curiosity is kind of having a shared page.
In some ways, oh, like, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm a little simplified.
Having a shared page where, uh, is that what you are referring to? Is that what you mean?
It's like, uh, you know, I, I imagine that you talk with a friend and then it tells you, oh, is that what you experienced?
Yeah. And then you tell them, yeah, but not quite. Yes. That's the, that's, that's the moment where you fine tune it.
That's the moment where you reiterate until you arrive to accuracy. So, that's the semi short answer.
Awesome. Yeah.
Yeah. All right.
Yeah. All right.
