Hi everyone. It's really nice to be here remotely. My name is Kennedy Schall. I'm the CEO of Rejuve
Biotech. I'm broadcasting to you from Orange County, California from the Methuselah Fly Lab.
Those are the Methuselah flies in those cages behind me. And I'm going to be talking today
about deciphering longevity using insights from our Methuselah flies and advanced artificial
intelligence. Rejuve Bio is a spinoff company of Singularity Net, which is also now part of the
ASI Alliance led by Ben Goertzel. So we are developing our AI alongside Singularity Net and
Ben Goertzel and his amazing insights and philosophy on AI and AGI. So my background is in evolutionary
biology and genetics. I trained at UC Irvine with Michael Rose. Some of you might have heard of
him. He's a considered... What? He's a big fan. Yeah, big fan. Yeah, Michael Rose is considered by many to
be a father of the longevity field. He is credited with coining the term antagonistic pleiotropy,
which is a theory of certain genes being beneficial early in life and then being detrimental later in
life and thus creating the reason why we age from an evolutionary perspective. And so Dr. Rose started
the world's longest evolutionary biology experiment that is still running today, the Methuselah Fly
Project. We started selecting these flies in 1980 by taking the longest lived flies from each generation
and letting them contribute to the next generation. And over 44 years now and 400 generations, we have
flies that now have an average lifespan of about 135 days. And we have two groups of Methuselah flies. So
we have the original O flies, which have an average lifespan of about 70 days. And then in 2008, I took a
group of the O flies and continued to apply selective pressure to them. And now we have the super Methuselah
or super O flies that have a much longer lifespan. And I'm continuing to select them for longevity even
today. So these flies provide a treasure trove of genetic information. This is what a typical
survivorship curve looks like. For females, the male one looks pretty similar. So you can see a really
nice delineation between our control group here, the original Methuselah flies, and then our super
methuselah flies, as they die off. And we have five replicate populations of each cohort.
So the Methuselah flies, when we delve into their genomics and transcriptomics, we find a lot of
differences. And typically, we find a mutation burden of about 20% in the Methuselah flies versus our
control flies. One interesting thing is that the original Methuselah flies, the O flies, have slightly
more mutations than the super O flies. We believe that that suggests that maybe the super O flies have
honed in on some of the more beneficial mutations. And so they have slightly less. But we have more
experiments planned to figure out exactly why that is. And what's interesting about that in relation to
studying longevity in humans is that when you look at super centenarians in relation to the general
human population, you find that the mutation burden is also about 20%, eyeballing that. So it's kind of
an interesting parallel that we find between the Methuselah flies and the control flies and
super centenarians versus control humans. Doing some transcription factor analysis of these
populations, we've found some really nice delineation in expression that separates these
populations really nicely. And we've zeroed in on four specific transcription factors that are highly
active in our super Methuselah flies and suppressed in our control flies. And what's interesting about
these four transcription factors is that they also seem to suppress downstream these other transcription
factors that are highly active in our control flies. And a lot of these transcription factors are
things that have to do with developmental processes. So this also supports some of the antagonistic
phyotropia theories and some theories put forth by one of our advisors, Jao Pedro de Maglis, about those
kind of runaway developmental processes early in life that are beneficial, being detrimental early,
being detrimental later in life. It appears that the super Methuselah flies have
developed a way to sort of calm down some of those developmental processes later in life so that
they're not so deleterious to them and they are able to live longer. But we have more experiments planned to
figure out exactly what is going on here. But you can see there's actually quite a nice delineation between
between the different populations and the activity and expression of these transcription factors.
So in our functional analysis, what we basically find is that the Methuselah flies overall have better
metabolic function than the bee flies. We have better representation in carbohydrate metabolism,
in ion transport processes, ATP metabolism, better aerobic respiration, mitochondrial processes.
But what's interesting is, you know, like we said about controlling some of the developmental
processes later in life, the super Methuselah flies have less representation compared to the control
flies when it relates to DNA replication and cell division. So that kind of makes a little light bulb go
off that they've kind of figured out how to not let those developmental processes run away and,
you know, cause things like cancer later in life.
So where does the AI come in? So with our partners at Singularity Net, we are developing some advanced
neuro-symbolic architecture called OpenCog Hyperon, which centers around a bio-atom space, which is a
knowledge metagraph, a self-organizing, self-modifying graph of graphs where you can take seemingly
unrelated data and use multiple AI algorithms and agents to find patterns in that unrelated data
and see what's in there. What's really great about this in biomedical research is that oftentimes we are
lacking data, data sets might be too small, or there's various holes in the data for whatever reason.
And the way that this advanced AI is structured is that it works more like a human brain so that these multiple AI
algorithms work together to kind of plug in those holes and you can still get a viable answer, you can still get
some reasoning, a hypothesis to work with to advance your research. And so this is something that we are developing
with our partners at Singularity Net and another one of their spinoffs, True AGI, and it's also being
developed as a platform. So a nice little primordial proof of concept that we could say for this is an
earlier version of this AI that Ben Gertzel developed about 12 years ago now. We actually used to study
the genome and transcriptome of the Methusel flies and compare it to publicly available human data sets
and we used it to identify common pathways that were involved in neurodegenerative disorders and at this
time specifically we were looking for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. We also used the AI to identify
traditional Chinese medicines and herbs that might act on those pathways and we did hundreds of fly
trials in the lab. I looked for a combination of substances that made my control flies live longer,
that didn't damage my super Methusel flies, that worked in a fly model of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's,
restoring their crawling ability and restoring their lifespan to normal. And you can see that in this
crawling assay right here, it restored their calling ability and restored their lifespan to normal.
We actually then did an IRB approved pilot at Hogue Hospital in Newport Beach at the Neurosciences
Institute where we added this supplement that was all made of things on the FDA grass list to a
cohort of Alzheimer's patients just to their normal regimen of drugs that was kept stable throughout 15
months. And in our mild to moderate patients we saw that their cognitive function as measured by the
CER some some of boxes stayed pretty close to baseline just adding this this natural supplement
um to to their normal regimen of of drugs um and so this was this was a supplement that was that was AI
um selected and developed and and um from an older version of the platform that we're developing now
um obviously it's it's more advanced and and better now so we're hoping to do more of these types of of
studies and uh we still have this supplement available that um we will be manufacturing and distributing and then also using it as a jumping off point um for for drug discovery itself to see what's what's really going on there.
So we have used the AI to go through flies to go to humans and you know didn't hurt anybody and possibly help some people.
So as I said we are developing the um AI as a end-to-end research platform as well um the
neurosymbolic architecture combined with the uh bio atom space uh makes it possible for us to
to help with everything from basic science research to translational medicine all the way through drug
discovery through hypothesis generation um making inferences actually reasoning and not only can you
query the AI and it gives you a nice little um this is an example of a a causal hypothesis tree
tree between a a gene and a um phenotype that's produced produced by that gene um but it will also
be able to generate nice reports for you of why it got the answer that it did so it's not a black box
generative AI type of um platform so we're hoping that researchers will be more inclined to use it since
it can generate a nice report that you can file alongside your your ind or your clinical trial
uh paperwork with with the fda so that's what we have on the horizon for for our ai that we're
developing with singularity net and then our next steps in the lab and um and uh and with singularity
net is a continued analysis we want to do mitochondrial analysis on the flies and phenotypes and expression
phenotype studies and some more advanced techniques uh supervised mixomics methods with the bio atom
space um longitudinal studies we want to take uh transcriptome and uh genomes of the methusel
flies at various life stages to see exactly how things change throughout their life um and some
integrated multi-omic modeling using open cog hyperon the new neurosymbolic architecture from from
singularity net um integrating pathways uh from genetic and transcriptomic data to identify crucial
longevity pathways that we can target to actually develop uh therapeutics for aging related diseases
so yeah that's what we have on on tap for the next uh year or so so with that i want to say thank
you to addy for inviting me and um and misha for for organizing my my call in if anybody has
questions you can email me at either one of those two addresses and i'm very happy to to respond and
take any questions so yeah thank you kennedy i think we uh if you have time yourself we can maybe do
three really good quick questions if anybody has yeah sure um going back to the actual way you're modeling
um just one quick clarification and then a question clarification when you're modeling are you testing
these new substances on a model of the fly or are you using open cob to create new substances and then
testing on actual flies and then sorry go ahead and the full question is what's the difference between
what you're finding uh with algorithmically generated uh drugs and supplements versus with human
determinants um so the first part so in the case of the the alzheimer's supplement that we developed
um we actually it was a it was a version of um open it was open cod classic that was used to select
that supplement so it was a much older it was an older version of hyperon is the new version of the
architecture um and so it was it basically just selected a group of substances that was most likely
to work on the uh alzheimer's pathways that it also selected but we did like hundreds of fly trials
testing all of those in um in different combinations in different um in different doses and we did use a fly
model for for alzheimer's disease that was developed um in partnership with uh professor john tower at keck
medicine at usc and so that was an actual um transgenic um miff prestone induced fly model for
for alzheimer's that um flies that produce the beta amyloid protein and um tau as well and it worked in both of
those both of those models and then um sorry can you repeat the second part of your question again
the question is what's the difference between uh outputs like qualitatively what's the difference
between outputs from algorithmic sources versus human sort of first principles inspired by humans
um the different sorry the differences in like success rates or uh not so much in success rates as in
actually like the kinds of things that it finds oh the kinds of things that it finds um you know i uh
i mean we i mean there so in this particular study because we worked very closely with several longevity
physicians and a cardiologist and the the substances that we had honed in on through manual literature
and genomic research on our own were actually um very similar to the pathways and substances that the ai
selected um i if i my memory serves me correctly i'd say the list at that time was about 80 percent similar
um now uh now it's it's now it's probably closer to 90 percent is probably what i'd say but um but yeah
it's it's it's it's pretty it's pretty good it's pretty good it's pretty good interesting yeah
any other questions from one over there uh i was wondering how like um symbolic ai approaches
hold off when you have like uh like more like incomplete like epistemic information like in the case
of say like uh like god mike or biden like how like you don't know like sort of like how complete
picture of the sort of like the things that you're working with like how useful like can the um symbolic
approaches be yeah um well the the theory with the symbolic approach is that there are um and full
disclosure i'm i'm not an ai scientist i'm literally just a biologist so all the all the ai stuff that i
know ben gertzel has literally taught me um so uh and so the way that it's been explained to me because
i have asked that question before is that the um other ai algorithms that are working together
synergistically would be able to um generate some um synthetic data that would fill in the gaps that
would be appropriate to the problem that they are solving or the query that's that's been asked of
of the system um and uh based on the the biological uh systems modeling that we've designed the system
to do it should uh it should give a a relatively um accurate answer it's that's that's how it's been
explained to me so one more question on once on twice good all right awesome that'll be it thank you
all right thank you thank you guys so much thank you for having me thank you yes next next time we'll
get you in person yeah yeah next time in person yeah yeah for sure all right bye guys thank you so
much okay bye
