What's up, YouTube?
Today we're gonna be talking about how branding
and marketing distorts reality and controls your mind.
Very, very large claim, but I promise
there's some sophistication behind it, right?
So, I mean, I think a good example to start off
with this idea, right, is how, you know,
distorting reality in the sense that it's controlling
the way you're perceiving and using
and thinking about an object, right?
So I can give you an example, a sort of simple one.
Let's say you have a black T-shirt,
sort of an unbranded black T-shirt you maybe buy
from a convenience store, right?
Now, this thing generally is not, you know,
it's not a designer brand or some big streetwear brand.
It's like anybody can get it, very achievable
for most people to go ahead and get a hold of this, right?
Now, if you were to go ahead and slap,
now you can either physically put the logo on there
or you can tell somebody that it has it
and convince them of that, right?
Say it's a Louis Vuitton logo, Gucci, Balenciaga,
Off-White, Nike, any of these brands, right?
You don't even have to physically put the logo on there.
You can just associate that logo with it
and say this is a Louis Vuitton
or a Balenciaga T-shirt or whatever.
All of a sudden, if people are convinced of that, right?
Which is sort of the job of branding and marketing, right?
They're now in a sense given an instruction,
a lens of viewing the object, a prior, right?
That they now treat it completely differently, right?
Now they're gonna, this thing's gonna be way more expensive.
They will literally give more of their bank account to you, right?
Because of the way this thing is being perceived by them, right?
You know, not only the monetary thing, but also like the product,
you know, you may, if you know it's a very expensive, valuable thing,
you may feel differently when wearing it, right?
So, you know, it's not hard to believe that when you wear something
that's thought of as very valuable or expensive or exclusive,
you may feel a little more confident.
You may feel, maybe you'll have a bit more of an ego
or a little arrogance or your sense of self
would be a little different, right?
I mean, I think a lot of people wear clothes of a certain brands
or cars of a certain brands or whatever
because of that sort of linguistic synesthetic association, right?
Where there's not necessarily a physically different thing,
but the branding of it, the perception of it
that's shared between you and other parties and agents
now has this effect.
And so, yeah, when I put on some really nice piece of clothing,
even if I think maybe it looks ugly,
there is a level of myself that I'm like,
oh man, I feel more confident, right?
And this is also why we say, you know, the way you dress yourself, right?
Like I could, you know, you could have somebody
who's the savior of everything, the smartest person, whatever,
and maybe they're really good looking, right?
Like way better looking than me or anybody that even exists, right?
Whatever.
You have that person.
And the interesting thing with that though
is that you can dress them up a certain way
and that will also change the context of those clothes, right?
So I also would say that if you have someone
that's more familiar and understood and known and associated
as attractive or powerful or valuable,
that also changes the context of the thing
that's applied and, you know, and distributed on it, right?
So this is also part of why, you know,
when we give, you know, celebrities or notable figures,
clothes, products or whatever to use or wear,
that also changes the social context
and agreement of that product, right?
In a lot of ways, this is kind of the brilliant story
of how Nike launched to the heights that they did
with Michael Jordan and all that, right?
And it's interesting, you know,
if I were to design a very basic,
let's just say the t-shirt,
just not a lot of effort was put into it.
In my opinion, it may not look that good,
but if I get someone who is in a very large position
of influence to wear this,
that's respected for their fashion or clothing
or reputation or whatever,
all of a sudden that changes that.
I didn't change anything physically about the product, right?
I'm not even, this time I'm not even, you know,
telling you it's a Louis Vuitton product or whatever.
I'm giving it to this person,
their photograph seen wearing this, whatever,
and now this is sought after, it's more exclusive,
the value goes to the roof.
And not only that,
but it can literally change the way you feel
when you see the product or you wear it
or you use it or whatever, right?
And you also have to think about
the way we create ecosystems, right?
You know, the sort of,
one of the aspects about, you know,
top companies or universities or whatever
is there is that border, that exclusiveness, right?
There is a shared agreement
between the people that are in it
that these are the people that are not in it
because that's sort of what defines the distinction
in the first place.
And so, yes, when you look at top schools
and organizations and companies
and products or whatever,
the branding, the marketing is the appeal.
It's not that it's fake or it's not needed.
It's very much a real part of the fabric
about how that fits into a society
and a culture and a collective.
You actually kind of need that to a degree, right?
Because that acts as the instructions,
sort of this kind of,
it's a sort of a more linguistic,
you know, cognitive, whatever set of instructions
and ways of viewing the thing.
And in a lot of ways,
you can actually work more efficiently
because it may cost you less
if that's directly put into
some type of cultural context,
if that makes sense at all.
And so, you know,
I can also talk about Apple, for instance, right?
In a lot of ways of what Apple has done
with their whole reality distortion field effect thing, right?
Is that it's not the product that's as valuable,
it's actually the system, it's the whole.
It's the whole versus the parts
that are valuable, right?
If you have the whole Apple ecosystem,
which some people do and some people don't, right?
Some people can still get by with just one product.
But generally, I think it would probably feel
a little bit more rewarding
to be a part of that ecosystem.
And not only you and your family,
but also your friends
and the people you interact with, right?
That's in a sense that, you know,
ecosystem is like an organism.
It has these boundaries,
it has this, you know,
internal coherence between itself.
And there is this, you know, mutually,
you know, this kind of mutual agreement
between you and the users about who you are
and what you're doing because that's cultural.
I can tell you right now,
if, you know, if Apple's changed
the way iMessage looked
and it was no longer blue
and everything was green or a different color,
people would feel differently about it, right?
If your iPhone or your Mac or Apple Watch
had a slight different look to it
and different branding,
would you still think of it
and use it in the same way, right?
And it's the same reason that, you know,
these sort of cognitive, linguistic,
symbolic things that we add on to something,
say, physical,
can dramatically change the way that they're used
and contextualized and understood.
And even those associations
can literally change the way
that we feel and interact with it.
Now, also, I'll tie into another type of apple,
which is not the company, but the fruit, right?
So if you think about,
the way we think about the things
that we consume just in general,
in this case, we'll use, say, the apple fruit, right?
Like, I'm willing to bet
if you were to take, you know, two apples,
let's just say they were non-organic,
conventionally raised, whatever,
and if you were to convince one person
that this is the highest quality apple,
it's got all these different things, whatever,
it's really, really good for you,
would we notice a difference
in how their body reacted to that apple, right?
Now, I think there has been stuff
where we've looked about the placebo
for glucose and stuff like that to some degree,
but I'm willing to bet
if strong enough of an association was there,
they would probably have
a slightly different biological response
with that we could measure, right?
And that's literally by just branding
and marketing it differently, right?
I actually think, you know,
in some of the supposed benefits
we can see about, you know,
things that are considered healthy,
I genuinely think that a lot of the things
that may make it actually healthier for people
is the marketing and the branding
and, you know, since the belief
that that is actually good for them, right?
Now, I'm not saying it's going to do it,
you know, cure you of everything,
but it may be enough to, you know,
get some momentum rolling with that, right?
And it probably wouldn't be very hard
to figure this out, you know,
in an experimental setting.
And so, yeah, I just kind of wanted
to generally muse a little bit
about, you know, how branding
and marketing are basically
our perceptual lens,
our language of viewing reality
and interacting with, you know,
these objects, products, services, whatever.
You know, maybe I can finish off
with one more example
that you could also probably
try yourself right now.
It would be, let's take,
let's say there's a film
or an album or song or whatever
by a very well-known, respected artist, right?
Whoever it is.
And let's just say you, you know,
you practiced disconnecting
the context of that artist.
So let's just say that song
was no longer, you know,
that was no longer a Beatles song
or this is no longer a Nirvana song,
this is no longer a Led Zeppelin song,
this is no longer a Travis Scott song,
Eminem song, Juice WRLD song,
whatever it is, right?
Or this is no longer a Chris Nolan movie
or a Denis Villeneuve or anything, right?
Just disconnect that.
If you were to look at it as, you know,
some new random person who's coming up,
would you still experience the film
in the same way?
I think sometimes you would,
but also sometimes you wouldn't.
And, you know, I've actually experimented
with this a lot over the years.
And there are songs and films and photos
and all sorts of works of art
and products or whatever
that as soon as I disconnect
that context of the brand
and the reputation and those priors,
it no longer has the same visceral feeling to me.
It doesn't feel the same anymore, right?
And this may also be a way for you
to sort of judge things differently.
Like maybe, maybe part of the reason
you like this person's song or this movie
is because there's this sort of prior expectation
that's painting over it.
Like it's almost forcing you to like it
even if otherwise in a different context
you wouldn't like that, right?
So I think it's just something to think about.
I imagine that a lot of artists
just in the nature of their job
and their skill set
probably think about this a little bit more
than say, you know,
people generally in like the STEM field,
although they most certainly do at times.
And so I don't know,
I just thought that was something interesting
to talk about, ramble on for a little bit,
maybe give you some ideas.
Feel free to comment any questions
or things that come up.
And I will start to post more videos
pretty soon and often now.
And last thing, please like and subscribe.
Thank you.
