All right, what's up, y'all? Today we are doing a very impromptu salon event here at the Gruber AI Sandbox with me, this guy, and then this guy you might know, Dr. William Hahn. Introduce yourself.
Thanks, everybody, for joining us. Thanks, everybody, for coming in person. We're excited to kind of kick off this series and embrace our grand opening of our AI Sandbox this semester.
How many of you have heard of this thing called synesthesia? What is your idea of what synesthesia is? Karim. Our special repeat guest.
I believe you had mentioned it in your original video, which was talking about whether plants are actually agents. Is that correct?
Yes. This is related, but this is not the synesthesia thing specifically.
I think I'll let someone else start the conversation.
Well, maybe let's start. Does anyone have synesthesia?
Yeah.
I mean, I think the number three is yellow. Oh, that's what it is? Then I have it, yeah.
Okay.
Is your three also yellow?
My three's green.
Your three's green.
My one's red. My two's blue.
It's very simple.
Okay. So synesthesia is basically this idea that you're associating, you know, shapes with feelings, your numbers, your colors.
There's these cross associations and mixing between senses. So some people can hear colors, they'll see sounds, they'll have all these types of things.
And, you know, if you spend a lot of time online, you'll hear lots of stories, very, very wild examples of what this can turn into.
And I think all of you probably know what language is, but I want to hear somebody's definition of what language is. Who wants to take a shot at it?
Well, first a question, actually. In synesthesia, is the association always the same? Do you always associate a number with a certain smell or color?
No. It can change. It can, it can, it can, it seems it can change in people's lifetime and, and also in response to certain stressors, activities, substances, all that type of stuff.
But even amongst synesthesia literature, there are various different kinds of synesthesia, different associations, associations, right?
So there are shapes and color and sound and emotion and texture associations. There's all these different types of things. You can get a very wide range of mixes.
Although there are non-trivial sort of groupings that exist across people.
Yeah. But so what, what, what is the general consensus of, of when you guys think of language? What is language in your perspective?
Well, I think that it's an abstract representation of a concrete object. Like human language, uh, encodes information on various physical, uh, phenomena, biological languages, uh, encode things like, for example, proteins, um, maybe even the neural networks in your brain.
Or another way to encode physical information, essentially an abstract representation of something in a different space.
So what you're saying is on this, this wine bottle here, this Moscato thing, right? Camera can't see it, but you'll have to believe that I'm showing you. So Moscato, right? Um, why is it that those shapes on that dead, that slice of dead tree on that heated glass tells you it's a wine bottle? If you didn't know.
Uh, cause those are just shapes and colors.
Well, those are features.
You turn it around. That's what I'm talking about.
Those are features.
Yes.
And those features are in the space of colors, in the space of colors creating shapes, which create higher level features until you get to the highest level, you know, a level high enough for it to be a wine bottle.
Do they have to be colors and shapes?
Uh, I mean, the wine bottle in a different space would be like the word wine bottle or even like the word, uh, I mean, alcohol.
Mm-hmm.
So it, like that would be the wine bottle in a different space other than the space of my vision.
What about David?
Um, I, I thought it's more of an abstract means of, um, communication and expression and it does not necessarily have to be favorable.
I take the abstract out altogether. I don't think language is inherently abstract. I mean, there, there's a sense in which when we're talking about language, we're talking about it in the abstract, but language is just a set of rules for communicating with a set of underlying tokens, right?
They're symbols. It doesn't matter what those symbols are, what kind of symbols they are and it has both grammar, right? Syntax and semantics.
What other ways could the wine bottle be described and represented?
I mean, I would think of like any like structure, which is holding like wine and is some, oh, actually, would it have to be transparent?
Yeah. Wait, it's not logic. You could have an oak barrel filled with wine and call it a wine bottle.
You could. Yes.
Some old wine bottles were clay.
Or wine skin.
Oh, yeah. Wine skins.
I think anything with this shape, people associate with wine.
Or alcohol.
Mm-hmm.
It could be any kind of alcohol.
Like a soju.
Or a pichu.
Yeah, I feel like when it's longer, it's usually associated with wine.
But I think they're asking you, how do you know that?
Why do you think that?
Oh, we, I think over time we learn to associate certain shapes with like a meaning, for example, like wine.
Like this shape I've learned to associate over time with wine or alcohol.
And what, what does, what is sort of the experiential aspect of meaning in your, in your head?
I'm actually not even going to say brain, I'm going to say mind.
Mind.
I'm going very specifically not say brain, I'm going to say mind.
Right?
Like what, what actually constructs that idea of a meaning, that feeling of a meaning in your head?
Probably memory.
Or like reinforced learning.
Any other takers?
I think it's a qualia associated with abstract thoughts, if I had to guess.
Why is it that you can have a wine bottle and I can have many, many different languages describe it using different forms of letters and shapes and sounds?
There's the famous click language.
There might be something called an olfactory language, a small language that we'll get into later.
Could you represent that wine using a musical notation and make a song?
That's describing all the aspects of that wine in a very predictable way.
You can, as long as you define it.
Yes.
Do you have to define it?
Oh, you could jump to, you guys have heard of con languages, right?
Con languages, yeah.
You want to explain it?
Um, I think there's like a programming version of these, um, code call?
Uh, I'm probably botching the term, you guys can correct me.
But essentially, you can create these, like, custom programming language, like, there's these, like, programming competitions where you have to create, like, code which, um, does a certain task in the minimum amount of, um, like, instructions.
That's the golf idea.
Yeah.
Right.
But you could create your own programming language where the default, um, action where you, when you don't write any code whatsoever is performing, like, a certain program.
And, um, you could, like, basically use, like, con, like, programming languages, might be using the wrong term.
There's, like, uh, billions of different ways you could encode, like, a, um, single, like, um, like the same program in different languages.
Um, so, it's not, like, it seems to be a very common and general property, like, as far as I'm concerned.
What's the most unconventional idea of a language you could think of?
Let's just get speculative for a moment, right?
Like, what's the wildest language you could possibly think of?
Something that describes something.
What's the most unconventional way?
Well, okay.
I've always thought that.
That's kind of weird.
Yeah.
That's your weirdness?
Yeah.
That was weird.
I'd say what you mentioned the other day with smell.
Mm-hmm.
Could you have a emotional language?
Well, as long as we're both able to treat emotions, the experience of emotion, as a word or symbol in our minds and use it to communicate, say, through music.
That would have a huge assumption underlying it.
Yes.
I mean, in a sense, you could have an emotion associated with that pencil.
That would have a huge assumption that we have similar or same emotions.
How do you induce the sameness, though, so that people can converse over that?
Yeah.
But isn't that an assumption of every language?
Yes.
That there's some kind of shared experience, emotional or otherwise, that we can then refer to?
I would say that I actually, you know, if you think about what we're talking about, languages here, right, as we're saying, there are these sort of associations, right?
And synesthesia is an association.
I actually think that what we take for as language with our written language and our vocalized language or whatever, they are sensory associations.
Since, you know, you're associating a meaning or sound with those shapes.
There's nothing about this shape that means S or chomps with an S, chomps.
We're not sponsored.
We want them to sponsor us.
And then, you know, 12 or pencil or whatever, right?
There's nothing about those shapes that we're putting on this material in front of us that actually is equated to that.
It's only sort of from the observer that we're doing that.
And it just so happens that we all agree on that.
And so we can converse using that, right?
If I only knew Mandarin Chinese and you guys all knew French or English, good luck trying to communicate.
It's going to be much harder, right?
And so I think my sort of idea is that language is synesthesia, right?
They're just associations, right?
And if you think about it, it's really more about, you know, what was potentially selected over time for sake of convenience, right?
I think it's interesting that one of the more common ways that we think, we think in terms of images and words and sounds in our head, right?
Which also happens to be the way that we can more easily communicate across the human species.
But it's not universal.
Exactly.
It's not universal.
Does language exist in a vacuum?
Does the existence of a language imply that connection?
So what do you imagine in terms of the evolution of languages on the planet?
Mind reading.
Do you think we'll have mind reading languages?
Yeah.
Do you think they exist now?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
What do they look like to you?
Mind reading?
Yeah.
Well, reading eyes, I'd call it universal as far as I think that it crosses over.
So this would extend the body language and things like that?
Eye language.
Eye language.
Yeah.
Universal or universally learnable?
Not learnable for cats.
For a lot of humans though, it's not very easy to read eye language and you have to learn it actually explicitly.
I'm sure there's humans like that in the room besides me.
Yes.
A handful of us.
So in that sense, it can't possibly be universally understood.
And there must not be universally displayed versions of them.
Otherwise, there wouldn't be people who can read some people who wouldn't be able to read others.
Wouldn't there be?
I mean, I think there are some people who aren't verbal, right?
That's the thing.
They can't necessarily participate in the same forms of language that other people do.
There are people who speak different languages, right?
And they can't participate in...
They might not be able to participate in language X, but they certainly participate in language Y.
Why?
But then why can cats learn facial language, but some humans are unable to?
Whereas cats seem to have a very difficult time learning, say, English or Russian or whatever language.
Do they?
Prefrontal cortex?
I mean, not having it as developed as a language.
Yes, but why then are some humans worse at that?
Maybe because we've evolved to pick up different patterns depending on what was more useful or not to survive.
When language first was introduced, the part of our brains, right, our cortex grew.
So, and that's kind of what differentiates us evolutionarily.
I'm sorry, when was language first introduced?
When was it?
Yes.
I don't know when.
I know that that part of the cortex, or that's a theory, right?
Because that part of our cortex, the parts that are associated with language, grew.
Can anyone point me to a time before language?
Do we consider mathematics a language?
Well, that brings up what I was going to mention.
There's an age-old debate, particularly in mathematics, is it invented or discovered?
Yeah.
And the unreasonable effectiveness of that discovery.
Maybe, 200,000 years ago, in terms of language was theorized a week ago.
Yeah, I was going to say one through three.
Was it the first spoken language?
Or written?
Because wasn't ancient Sumerian the first written language?
No, it's simply the oldest one that we still have records of.
Okay.
And also, it happens what we interpret as a language.
Maybe there were things before that that we wouldn't...
We'd all recognize them now.
Yeah.
It's the oldest that we know of.
So, like the question with mathematics, are human languages invented or are they discovered?
Are they inevitable, natural objects that we kind of stumble upon?
Is that distinction meaningful?
And this is also sort of asking the idea, is there anything such as new?
So, in the creative process, people say, oh, you're just taking two different things that weren't combined before,
and you experience that as something new.
But that's everything.
Exactly.
Makes sense, right?
But is there...
What would you call something that develops through both causal intervention and the rest of the environment?
Right?
Is...
You can say, is a word invented, maybe?
Maybe.
But can you say, is the entire language invented?
Like, invented by whom?
Doesn't invent...
Need a...
Think time?
Can I interject one more?
Yeah.
That's the point.
So, if you have any...
Like, if you're using the block model of the universe where the past and present coexists,
and what we consider now is essentially just like a slice of it,
then technically, everything in the future currently...
It kind of exists.
Like all future languages and all past ones.
So, like, I figured I would add that.
Didn't you?
Sorry.
No, it's an interesting thing.
But to that extent, if everything exists, then everything is discovered.
And can you have other...
I'm not sure.
Let's say facets of a mind.
Have any of you heard of topomancy?
So, I believe that this is something about, you know, how we talk.
There's a voice in your head or some other thing that's doing the talking or thinking,
whatever.
And, you know, some people will take this thing, even if they don't have it,
and they'll train this to a degree where it's like an entirely different entity.
It's almost like they have DID to a sense, but they're still communicating with it.
And so people will spend thousands of hours, long periods of time training this,
and they'll have different representations.
They'll be, you know, a different gender or a different age or a different culture,
or they made up a brand new culture.
It could be an alien.
It could be a dream entity.
It could be all these different things that people can create that we can help.
So how would this be different from multiple personality syndrome?
Is it so different?
Is this like an internal monologue?
It's like a...
If normally your internal monologue is a voice, it's like you're building it up to almost like
there's an entire another person inside of you.
Like with a range of personality and its own memories, it can think and talk in its own
language in a sense.
And it can have its own like facial features.
And it doesn't have to actually be a face.
It could be something you recognize as a face.
And this would be in the context of someone doing this purposefully for themselves.
So people will say they sometimes experience this in dreams or sleep deprived states,
you're under certain substances, but this is something you can train in a sober state.
There's people that specifically practice for this.
Does anyone here write?
Write?
Yeah.
Right?
Or write?
Yes.
Like write?
Like fiction?
Every now and then.
In the past.
Have you experienced the feeling of when a character comes to you?
Yes.
Is that what you're talking about?
You could say that's a form of topomancy.
That's one of the ways people would train it.
Right?
Oh.
T-U-L-P-A.
Yeah.
T-U-L-P-A.
Okay.
Got it.
I think it connects the two.
And so it's interesting that it's considered pretty esoteric.
Right?
This topomancy thing.
Right?
But I actually think we all have some form of this, which is what we call the voice in
our head or whatever.
And the question is, is how much is the voice in our head representative of who we truly
are?
Well, this is like, did you watch the Bruce Hood video?
The self illusion?
I haven't watched that yet.
Yeah.
It's a great clip.
We'll link to it.
We'll link it, yeah.
And this neuroscientist, Bruce, he claims that our notion of self is really an illusion.
And it's not that it's not real, but it's just not what we think it is.
And the joke I put with it is that we are all figments of our own imagination.
And I think what you're suggesting is instantiating multiple sort of software personalities or software selves purposely.
Yeah.
This happens a lot with trauma, unfortunately.
People in very difficult emotional situations will create another figment, let's say, that
can then help balance those very powerful emotions.
Yeah.
Maybe like different sorts of like, like not different people necessarily, but like within
your internal monologue, there's like a different kind of like perspective that you're talking
to.
It can sometimes range that you're talking to an entirely different person.
And what's interesting is people have said that they've, they've almost taken on their
own life.
Like you can talk to them.
They'll go walk away somewhere else, come back later in the day.
And they had a whole set of experiences.
And it's like, you're not consciously thinking of that.
You're not actively thinking of that, at least to your perception.
And yet this is happening.
Does anyone here not have one in your monologue?
That was going to be my next question.
Yeah.
Cause some people don't.
I know some people don't.
Everyone has one?
I mean, I don't really.
An inner monologue doesn't necessarily have to be voice, by the way.
Although if anyone doesn't have voice, that's interesting too.
Yeah.
I think in images.
Yeah.
Your inner monologue is not verbal?
Yeah, I guess.
No, I think in images.
That is so cool.
Yeah.
Do tell.
Oh, oh, well, well, whenever I think of the past, I think of like an array of images
or like when I think of a concept, I think of like when I saw it on a page.
Okay.
That doesn't count.
That's, no, but do you have an inner monologue?
No.
No, it's not voice.
It's image.
You have no voice in your head.
Unless I talk to myself, like forcibly, like to simulate an inner monologue.
We've found one.
It doesn't really come naturally now.
Level up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Without speaking.
We read quietly.
Like is there a voice in your head when you read a page?
That's kind of like your voice.
If there's no voice, are you good at speed reading?
Because apparently some speed readers are generally better at it because they don't have
the voice to read.
I have to use my finger.
Okay.
I'm really, I'm really, I really could do that well.
Interesting.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You can read without the monologue?
Without the monologue, super fast.
Also typing, but I don't think it's poorly.
I read without the monologue as well when I speed read, although when I read literature
like just for fun.
I usually do it with monologue for fun.
What about Fantasia, like internal sensory experience?
And so the classic example is you close your eyes and you think of an apple.
And now what, what did you experience?
Or the chomps, chomps.
You can imagine the chomps inside of your head, right?
Right.
Or a David bar, right?
You can, you can imagine that.
That's kind of a synesthesia I have.
I can eat things and imagine that sensory experience without actually doing so.
It could be good for cooking.
Or is that just a memory?
Or is it?
Essentially it is.
You can manipulate it.
Yeah.
But like I can imagine like taking a bite of chomps with a bite of lemon wedge.
And I've never done that before.
Okay.
But it kind of makes sense.
So someone had that for smell, for instance, they could infer and you smell.
Right.
We'll get into that in a bit.
But the thing that I want to finish up on as well for a bit, is also you've probably
all have heard of method actors.
Generally quite well liked in filmmaking, right?
And I think part of the interesting thing there-
He says what?
Huh?
Say what?
Method actors are well liked in filmmaking.
Well, well liked for their ability to take on the character.
Their performance is official.
Maybe not while they're filming.
Yeah.
Maybe not while they're filming.
Probably especially not while they're filming, but you know, afterwards if they recover.
Sorry if I offended any method actors.
Yes.
We love method actors.
We want them on the podcast.
So, you know, the thing that's interesting, right, is it is almost this type of tulpa
that you're building up in your head.
Right?
And you're embodying that tulpa.
You're building up an entirely different character with its own-
Like, you know, people think, okay, no, in a sense it is an actor's job to lie for
a living.
Like, that's kind of what it is, but you're not like, it's not the same as if you yourself
right now are lying per se, although maybe some do.
Right?
You're building on an entirely different character.
You're really getting in their shoes.
You're thinking the way they think, speaking the way they would.
Very good interviewers also do this, right?
And I think that's also technically a form of a tulpa.
Right?
And it's just you're more directly embodying and interacting with that.
Right?
What I'd be really curious to see is what happens to the personas and the characters that method
actors have built up in their head when they're done with the role.
Yeah, I don't think they go away.
Yeah.
This is something that almost frightened me as a kid with acting.
Right?
At least that's the closest word because I felt that way.
I felt like to really engage as a character, you're not faking it.
Yeah.
You're becoming that other person and your unconscious isn't going to know the difference.
And so I always thought there was this kind of playing with fire aspect.
Yeah.
To really engaging in a role like that.
Do you feel it's almost a state of self-hypnosis?
Yeah, a hundred percent.
But now, this would be interesting to try to apprentice.
This gets back to the synesthesia and learning different languages.
If people could safely and reliably instantiate multiple personalities in your mind, would that have utility?
Would you do that?
Right?
You could have your work personality that is really studious and types really fast and pays
attention to all the notes and all this other kind of stuff.
And then when the bell rings, that turns off.
You know, you sort of snap out of it like a coma and then you go back to your recreational self, whatever that might be.
And then on Monday morning, you can just punch back into that other personality.
Is that not something that everyone does?
Makes sense.
Kind of.
To some approximation, we do that.
That's what it means to go to work.
Different people speaking different languages.
Yeah.
I've always been a firm believer in that.
Yeah.
Hmm?
Yeah.
Did you say again?
That we're a different person when we speak different languages.
Uh-huh.
Sort of superior work.
I think it depends on the person, but for me, it is always in both different emotions
of me, like depending on the language I'm speaking.
So who speaks multiple languages?
I'm the same.
I think almost all of us.
Almost everybody.
I guess I guess.
So does everybody agree?
Are you a different person when you speak a different language?
Do you feel a different way?
I think like when I speak Portuguese specifically, it's a different culture, different sets of emotion,
different like strengths of the emotion.
I think my personality becomes a lot more outgoing when I speak Portuguese.
Yeah.
I mean, I think I switch languages when I feel certain things.
Yes.
I'm thinking in certain ways, but I wouldn't say that makes me a different person.
Yeah, maybe not a different person.
Like there's a weird discontinuity, which is weird, because sometimes it's like your mind changes.
How many of you guys randomly switch languages sometimes in speech?
You do?
I do.
Sometimes.
You never do?
I mean, only if I have to, but not.
You don't just naturally switch.
To the way that you do.
I know what you mean.
Well, how about music as the language, right?
Do you express yourself differently through that?
Yeah.
Or if mathematics is the language, how do you express yourself mathematically?
Yeah.
Well, I think that, and I think I've mentioned just to you before that in sheet music, there
are certain terms throughout the music composition that guides you in how to play the instrument.
You know, whether it's loud, soft, quick, slow, romantic, per se.
Yeah.
So I think there's a correlation of somewhat in that sense as well.
But even not written language, like one of the things that makes me most interested when I see handwritten scores like something that's sent to an arranger.
So I don't know if you guys know, you can go to the Library of Congress and down in their music room, they can pull like just about every score that was submitted for copyright.
So you can get like film scores and they are weird, low resolution, handwritten glyphs of something.
And I found this one score and it was strange because there were just places in the score where it was just like, Doug, you know what to do.
Doug was the arranger in this piece.
And there's just like random things where there's just like a note head with a stem and no notes on it.
Or there's a couple of well placed squiggles.
And the crazy thing is I intuitively knew what that sounded like.
You think it was just massive compression like shorthand?
It's massive compression, but it has to have some linguistic element because you can know almost exactly what that's supposed to sound like.
And an arranger can go and take this sheet that is heavily compressed and get the sound that the composer wants.
And none of that was expressed explicitly, so it has to be somehow a linguistic element, not in words.
Now, do you think, because this is something I was thinking about just the other day, is music purely intellectual?
Or is there something grounded about your ears and that response?
In other words, imagine you're stuck in solitary confinement or whatever it is, but you have a stack of sheet music, right?
Can you just jam out to sheet music?
Could that be your jukebox all day long?
I have heard that they use music to torture people.
Well, that's a separation.
They play Baby Shark in the parks now to prevent people from sleeping in them.
Are you serious?
Yeah.
No, this would be like, is there a, with enough training or exposure, could you get the same kind of rich experience just reading sheet music?
Or is there something wired about our ears and so on that makes the music interesting?
You mean without having played?
Yeah, no play.
Just like piano rolls, sheet scores.
Without having played.
I mean in the past.
Yeah, but I mean in the past.
The synthetics.
Yeah, the synthetics.
Let's just assume you've never even heard music.
Oh.
Could you appreciate, like is it in the sheet music?
No.
I can experience it in the sheet music.
I think maybe if you've heard this song before and you already have that experience with
it and then you read the sheet music, maybe it would elicit the same response.
But if somebody had never heard music.
No, I mean like just fresh sheet music and you look at it and you're like, you start moving.
I think if you learned how to mount between them properly, because this is how like a lot
of prosthetics work.
Yeah.
Like what's it called brain port?
The thing that goes on your tongue and people use it to be able to see and stuff.
And it's because if you can do two things at the same time, your brain learns to mount
one thing to another.
I don't know if you can do it by like if you were deaf and you only ever read music though.
I don't think, I don't know about that one.
But I think if you, if you read enough music while listening to enough music for like a
year straight, you could maybe just sort of read it and get it.
What's the music analog for deaf people?
Like as a musician though, back to what you were saying, I can.
I can see a score of something I've never seen before.
But are you playing it in your head?
I can hear it in my head, but I don't have to.
You can appreciate that.
You can hear it, like you can hear that.
Like in like a hyperphantasia type thing, like you can actually hear that.
I can.
Okay.
But I don't have to.
Got it.
Because I can like read through the music and actually appreciate the musical ideas
without having to process it.
Which is sort of like saying, do you have to read?
You know, we already do that in a sense when we have words and letters on a piece of paper,
when we have that voice in your head saying it, right?
It's also very similar.
Is art a language?
Yes.
A language?
Or can it be a language?
The article there.
I feel like it's kind of important.
Is this a language?
No.
No?
All right.
Let's see.
Let's hear it.
Let's hear it.
I think to have a language, you have to have a set of symbols, even if you can sort
of keep expanding the set of symbols as much as you want.
Kind of like what you were talking about.
So they've expanded the set of symbols in these film scores.
But I think you have to have some sort of like discrete set of symbols.
Symbols don't necessarily have to be discrete themselves.
They just have to have discrete elements.
Yes.
This is true.
I think some arts are probably, some types of art in language like Renaissance art is
all about symbols.
It's like, here's this piece of artwork and there's 200 symbols in it.
And if you can piece together the symbols, you can unpack what this piece of artwork is
about.
But other types of artwork that aren't based on sort of throwing 200 symbols into a piece
of artwork and making it really busy like that, I don't know.
But symbols can be like layered, like take languages that use cursive scripts.
So Arabic, the personal Arabic scripts, various other scripts of different languages where
there is a huge fluidity of the actual written text.
But there are features that are discrete.
But there can be other semantic information in actually how the text is drawn on the page.
And even in languages with discrete, right, symbols like say the Latin alphabet and English,
we use other typographical features to impose, or superimpose actually, some form of semantics
such as italics, moldface, underlying.
And it would seem all spoken languages are like that.
We're embedding digital discrete symbols inside of a larger analog kind of phrase.
And that can have emotion and emphasis.
But the phrase can also be broken down into symbols in some cases, right?
Like italic is a symbol.
Faces are symbols.
It's a discrete element, if you will.
No?
You discrete?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think you just have to have some kind of discrete symbol.
So I think I enjoy a lot of modern art.
I'm a weirdo like that.
You mean Jackson Pollock or you mean other modern art?
He means like the banana on the wall.
Yeah.
I enjoy that.
I also enjoy Jackson Pollock.
But Jackson Pollock's a great example because his work has like a vibe kind of and you get something from it.
But it doesn't have symbols in it really, I don't think.
If you can see them, I'm impressed.
I don't see any kind of symbols in that that are interpretable in the way that you would see in like a Renaissance painting or something.
Can a pixel be a symbol in and of itself and the collection of pixels as a collection of symbols if you go low enough?
In a QR code?
No.
I mean, you could represent a set of binary data with a pixel with a large enough color depth and you could use that to represent a concept, I suppose.
Other than that, not really.
Wait, do symbols have to convey meaning?
I mean, I think for a language to be good, if you will, every symbol has to convey meaning.
We could try to invent the worst language, I guess.
Well, think of how we visually represent faces on actual analog film or digitally on a screen.
Where that's a representation of a face that's something that's happening in front of you and it's displayed on there.
And then if you abstract away more details, you get something that looks like a cartoon.
You abstract and distort more information, you get something that looks like a Picasso.
And if you go really far, you'll get something that looks like a Jackson Pollock.
Right?
Are they all, you know, it sort of depends on the context and the understanding of the observer.
Disagree?
I think it's actually based on what the important parts are of whatever the symbol is.
So the symbol of a face, as you have sort of eyes and a nose or whatever else.
Yeah.
So are we referring to glyphs?
I have no sense.
Or are we referring to symbols abstractly?
I'm referring to symbols abstractly as sort of like a thing you recognize that means a thing.
So if I see a face, no matter where it is, if it's a cartoon or if it's on a person, I'm going to be like, that's a human face.
But face is the symbol or the glyph of a face, whatever it is.
Wait, it's a thing you understand that means a thing.
There's things that you don't understand yet that will eventually mean a thing when you learn them.
Yes, this is true.
Yeah.
But I think with faces and talking about Picasso and everything, you're not getting rid of the symbol.
You're just abstracting the symbol to sort of the most minimalist interpretate.
You're compressing it as much as you can.
Picasso has like, he just has a couple of eyes and a nose.
And he's managed to, he's impressive because he's managed to compress a face into just the elements that we absolutely need to recognize a face.
But I don't think you're getting away from discrete symbols there.
It reminds me of this idea of symbols that have some kind of mapping directly to what they're referring to, and then other symbols are just completely unrelated.
So like if we draw a face, there's some mapping between that and an actual face.
But if I write the letters F-A-C-E, they're just random.
They're kind of arbitrary.
They don't, they don't actually correspond to a face at all.
And what I think is interesting about animal communication is there's kind of a more of a direct mapping between the emotional state and the actual symbol.
And so the example I like is a lion can't fake its roar.
If it roars, it's angry.
It doesn't have any way of like making that noise when it's not in that emotional state.
But humans with language, I can just say like roar, not actually mean it, right?
In a sense, right?
You can, you can have a roar that's not a roar.
And I think that's what's interesting about like digital versus more analog language.
I don't know how to pronounce the word S-E-M-E-M-E-S.
Sorry.
Simees?
No.
Like semes?
S-E-M-E-M-E-S?
Like semaphore?
No.
Like like units of meaning.
Yeah.
Same as semaphore.
S-E-M-E-S?
S-E-M-E-M-E-M-E-S?
M-E-S?
Sym-E-M-E-M-E-M-E-M, I would think.
M-E-M-E-M-E-M-E...
Yeah.
Like semantic meme.
Yeah.
Yeah.
...attails.
Yeah.
Follow through these symbols, or are we talking about symbols in how we actually encode them?
So this is a good flag, because we might be talking past each other here.
When I'm talking about discrete symbols, and I can't speak for anyone else here,
I mean, you have one thing that either represents something in the real world,
or a set of things in the real world, or it represents a set of symbols.
But sort of at the bottom of the dependency chart, you have something in the real world.
And so a symbol can represent two symbols that represent three symbols that all represent things in the real world,
but somewhere at the bottom of that dependency chart, there's something in the real world, when I'm thinking of it.
What do you mean something in the real world?
So what about functional features like, say, a period?
I think that's just syntactic sugar.
Yeah, but that's still a symbol.
Yeah, but it's there, so that's to help with compression.
It's not a simian.
You can also change the meaning of a sentence.
Let's go eat kiss, or let's go eat comma kiss.
You can actually change the meaning.
It's true.
Dramatically.
Yeah.
Yeah, hey, like $5 million was lost over a comma, and what was it?
Main?
Forgot what the state is with that lawsuit.
When I'm thinking of symbols, I am separating that from syntax, which is what I would consider periods, or what I would consider in a coding language extra stuff.
Symbols, I mean, are something that at some point gets back to something that you can sense.
So like a word is a symbol?
A word is a symbol.
Okay, so you're talking about semim, simim, simim, whatever.
Yeah, maybe I need to use a different word.
I'm talking about simim.
Okay.
So that would be like in the Chinese language, if you have the symbol of the tree, or it's evolved over the years to mean many other things, but the basic foundation is based on a tree.
Yeah, absolutely, and I think as a meme can refer to many things, that's okay.
It can refer to lots of things in the real world, and you kind of have to infer based on the context, or maybe people keep it fuzzy on purpose.
People do this in poetry all of the time.
How?
Go ahead.
It's interesting, actually, to see how poetry is very different in different languages.
Yeah.
Like, for instance, the Russian language supports a far more flexible syntax, and so you don't have the same awkwardness that you do when you read English poetry.
What do you mean by flexible in this case?
I mean, word order's not fixed, and it really would not sound awkward if you switched up word order in a sentence.
Yeah, like, he ate, or ate he.
Yeah, and, like, you would say that in speech, and it wouldn't be weird at all.
Yeah.
So, when you use, right, it does carry semantic meaning.
Semantic meaning.
Redundancy much?
But it's not, it doesn't feel contrived.
And so you don't have that same, hey, this is weird, which can also be a bit of a drawback.
Right, because that, hey, this is weird in English poetry causes you to stop, and, um, I don't know, it kind of interrupts you, your mind, at least in my experience.
Yeah, TSL uses this a lot.
He'll even have, like, a single word, and then he'll have three lines before the next line intentionally to make you stop and process what you just read and then collect yourself and move on to the next thing.
But anyone have that experience with, like, poetry in different languages? Latin's also similar. You don't have as much awkwardness.
What is language missing? If we were to improve language over the next decade, the next hundred years, what is it that's difficult to do in human language that we would want?
Is it a constraint by the brain and what it can process, so you can't execute program language in your brain, so that's the constraint?
I mean, I'm not convinced you can't run programs in your head.
Because people used to write down programs for quite a while.
I think we, um, will eventually learn more about how, like, who we want to think, and we, um, will be able to construct languages, which allow us to think in more effectively.
I'm actually doubtful of this, unless you're talking about, sort of, we ascend into a computer, because there's, there's an effect that I, I can't remember the name of it, but essentially, um, languages have, like, an information, bits of information per word, different languages have different bits of information per word, and, and, and, in general, from what I understand, stand from this effect they studied, and it's mostly, it's only a few handful of languages, so maybe it doesn't extend,
but at least in the handful of languages they studied, people speak the languages at different speeds, but the, the bits of information are, are pretty constant, and so, um, Spanish speakers, uh, will speak a lot more quickly than, than English speakers, or even people who know both languages, they'll speak more quickly when they're speaking Spanish,
Spanish, and that's because, on average, Spanish has, uh, less bits of information per word,
and so, I'm, I'm doubtful that we can,
I think, maybe we could get a language where you can represent a lot of bits of information per word,
but at that point, you might be saying, like, one word a minute, or something.
So it would take a lot slower to process it.
Yeah, exactly, and, and so, I don't know if that gets around, and, and unless you're talking about, like, brain expansion, and plugging a chip in, or something like that, I don't know if that gets around the core issue.
So there's a very similar, uh, phenomenon with syntactical features, so for instance, your commas periods, word order, um, insert, uh, endings, whatever, prefixes, suffixes, infixes, which are interesting in some languages, they exist in English, right?
People always forget that we have infixes in English, they're just used as, they're just used for, uh, emphasis, expletives, usually.
You'll always sort of see it's a trade-off, because we have to convey the same types of information in syntax,
and we also have to convey it at effectively the same rate, right, overall.
So you'll find that not just the number of features available, but the frequency that is used of those features
seems to be relatively constant across different languages, when you average them out.
Do you think that there are no free lunches in language design in the same way there are no free lunches
in, like, sort of, op, optimal algorithms, and that you have to have a trade-off?
Well, the evidence seems to show it, and logic would indicate it as well.
But was the question, like, improvements on language that we don't have now?
Because, I mean, we don't have a way to describe things that are innately human, really, like...
Do you have an example?
In what language?
In.
You always describe it as sharp, as dull.
What does that mean?
That's how you describe a knife.
Yeah.
Um, I could say, like, I guess the fundamental thing that language is trying to solve is
taking whatever idea I have and putting it in someone else's brain.
So, like, my configuration of neurons going into someone else's configuration of neurons.
So wouldn't the most efficient possible language simply be a direct mapping, neurons to neurons?
Mind reading.
No, it wouldn't be the most efficient.
Mind communicating.
You have to read, and then you rewrite.
Mind rewriting.
It wouldn't be the most efficient.
It would be the most complete.
But we really don't need that complete picture.
Right?
We want something that's as compressed as possible for the things we care about.
Uh, well, how would you compress it further?
How would you compress further than every single bit?
Uh...
If you think about it, every bit is, like, as uncompressed as it gets.
Well, it's in the brain.
It's not bits.
It's neurons.
Bits of information, right?
You're conveying the entire piece of information.
Whereas, it'd be just fine to have a much smaller amount of information that just delivers just enough functional understanding.
And, to the best of my knowledge, our neurons do not have a structure that would allow that.
So, maybe language serves as a communication medium and a compression algorithm, so I don't have to get all of the bits of my brain into the brain.
And, maybe the structure of the language sort of compresses it for me, so I don't have to do a lot.
I just use my vernix area, and that knows the language, and that allows me to compress it and get it over to it.
That's how you pronounce that name?
I'm sorry.
Vernick?
Vernicky?
Vernicky?
Vernicky?
Vernicky?
Vernicky.
Vernicky.
Vern...
Vernicky.
So, how do you create a language that avoids misunderstandings?
Vern...
You don't?
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
Vern...
multiple ways of seeing it.
And that's almost the beauty of poetry or song lyrics,
where they can be interpreted in multiple different ways.
It's not a bug, it's a feature, right?
Yeah.
Oh, that's, okay, so if I wanted to talk to somebody
about differential geometry,
I can use the term differential geometry.
And if they know that term, they will know what I mean.
And therefore, by adding extra terms,
which don't take that much time to say, actually,
you can convey a lot of meaning in a very small amount of bits,
and if you were to have to describe it word for word
what exactly what it is.
And you could potentially, like our language has words
like is, the, we, there, going, or whatever.
And it's possible that there might be other sets of these,
of words like that, which we could use,
which might be more efficient somehow, in some way.
I don't know.
Just an idea.
Just an idea.
A lot of languages don't even have articles like the .
I don't understand the point of those articles.
Like Russian.
Yeah, Russian has no articles.
There's, I see no reason for them.
And how strong of a modifier is language of perception?
Almost all of us are multi-lingual.
Well, what about like, for example,
those sites where they don't have words for numbers
greater than five, and objectively, in tests,
they can't do math that's over, like, the number five?
You can, it just becomes more difficult.
There's also a few languages that are,
that don't have recursion.
So, like, a thing always represents a thing in the world.
You can't come up with a symbol that represents symbols
that represent a thing in the world.
Just everything, everything represents one thing in the world.
And there's only been a couple of those
that have been found by it.
Doesn't that just make communication take a lot longer?
I imagine it doesn't if all you're talking about
is things in the real world.
If your life is hunting and gathering,
which is where these languages come from,
then it's probably pretty useful to have a language
that doesn't have a bunch of extra features.
It's just like, all right, there's a thing I'm going to go kill.
But for things like rules and policies and philosophies,
it's hard not to have the courage.
That's kind of interesting, because if you had a language
in which it would be much harder to discuss
more complicated topics, right?
Language tends to reflect the things we need to convey the most.
If you make your language in such a way
that it's harder to convey things
that you don't want conveyed, or say,
you want to be simple hunter-gatherers,
would it be advantageous in some way?
These languages were like a whole controversial thing
in the field of linguistics, because the view before that
was you have to have recursion in your language,
and if you don't, it doesn't count.
And when the guy discovered this tribe that speaks this,
certainly the first one that got discovered, he got a tag,
and people were trying to discredit him and everything else.
Can they talk about blue things, or only particular things
that happen to be blue?
From what I understand, they can only talk about particular things
that happen to be blue.
They can only talk about things in the real world.
The guy started as a missionary and then lost his faith
and became a linguist, an interesting story on its own.
But he really struggled to talk to them as a missionary,
because he would be like, he would talk about this guy, Jesus,
and they would be like, where is he?
Is he with you?
When is he going to visit?
And he would, and like, the Bible's a very symbolic book,
and I think all religions are very symbolic.
So then they can't really have dramas or comedies, or?
Do you think language is a simulation?
And can be used to simulate them?
I think we can use it to simulate things, right?
Do you think language is inherently tied to religion,
and vice versa?
Yes.
And or vice versa?
In its creation, or over time?
Inherently.
In its existence.
If you think about it, the Lord's Prayer, right?
Our Father, whatever.
That is the most translated text.
It's translated into almost every known language,
and it's effectively the Rosetta Stone,
when you think about linguistics, right?
But if you think about a lot of languages, right,
the only record we have of them, the only reason we know about them,
is because they are used in some religious text of some religion somewhere.
Is there something inherently tied between religion and language,
where a religion requires a language to exist,
or vice versa between language and religion,
where a language requires a religion?
How do we describe religion?
What do we describe?
In a more abstract sense, right?
Beyond just the ones that we currently have.
Easy?
How do I write to you?
I think that the classical definition of religion would be,
there's a few different definitions.
The one that I go by is some set of ontological beliefs about the world,
so things that you believe are true, in some sense,
that don't necessarily have direct correspondence to measurable physical reality.
And so I think I have a very wide definition of religion, though.
A lot of people would disagree with that,
because a lot of people have ontological beliefs about the world
that don't correspond to measurable physical reality
and wouldn't consider that religion.
Well, it seems to me it's kind of the opposite of the language you were just discussing.
Rather than only focusing on real things, it's language precisely about things that aren't obviously in the world.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I think that's a good explanation.
And why is it that we can discuss and talk about things that are non-physical
or things we don't consider to be real?
I think we can make comparisons between them and things we know.
Who was it that talked about pain being sharp?
That was you.
I think that was a great observation.
So we can we can talk about pain as its own thing,
because at the bottom of the dependency chart is something in the real world,
which is which is sort of a sharp thing.
And I think we can do this arbitrarily so we can do the same thing with religion.
So I could say I'm Christian.
I could say I have a relationship with Jesus,
which is comparable to a relationship I would have with a human who is a very close friend of mine and everybody knows what it's like to have a close friend, I hope.
And so they can say, oh, okay, so I know about this thing, but it's in the real world.
And so I can imagine sort of the thing that he's talking about.
Would religious figures be represented as tulpas inside your mind?
I would argue they are.
Yeah.
Not for me.
Religious figures?
Huh?
Religious figures?
Yeah.
Does everyone have like an image that they come up with for like what they think God would be?
Depending on how strong.
Depending on how strong.
I mean, you have to also think about this for a minute though.
This is a slight side check, right?
But think about this for a moment, right?
Is that think of how much more, I don't know if economic or efficient is the right word, but okay, you believe you're being watched.
And someone doesn't have to spend the time and money and energy to do that.
And yet society or, you know, an organization or collective is still acting as if it's that, right?
That is a more efficient way of doing things, right?
And it's interesting because it's like, do things need to actually be kept track of to be held accountable?
Or do they need to believe they're being kept track of to be accountable?
An individual or group scale?
Hmm?
Individual or group scale?
Both.
We have two different phenomena.
Individual scale, yes they do.
Group scale, no they don't.
Yeah.
Well, is the topo almost like an accountability mechanism for people who believe a certain way about it?
And I say religion, it could even be a religion that you create.
A culture that you create.
A culture that values certain things that we normally attribute with some type of existing religion.
Right?
Are those things that are built up in your head, you know, people that will say, you know, God speaks to them.
Or this entity or this thing speaks to them.
You know, so many people throughout history have said their ideas came to them.
They heard it in a dream.
They heard it as a voice.
They just, something else brought it to them.
Right?
How do we represent what that is?
Right?
Because that does look and sound a little bit like a topo.
Right.
I think it's interesting you brought up dreams because I was thinking about that a few minutes ago.
Does anybody have a dream that they kind of vaguely remember in the past few months?
Right?
Did it have other characters in it?
No.
No?
Did anybody have a dream that had other characters and maybe some dialogue?
Sure.
A lot of it.
Yeah.
Do you feel like you were generating the other characters dialogue?
I've read about that.
Like, I mean, the only thing I'm familiar with is that I've read articles where they say that every character actually represents another aspect of you.
Right.
But I don't sense that in the dream.
But do you, in other words, like when something happens in the dream, right?
Does it feel surprising?
No.
Not for me ever.
For you it's never surprising.
No, I always feel like I'm generating it.
I've been a lucid dreamer for a long time.
But even if there's like dialogue in the other character, you're puppeting the other character.
Yeah, and I feel like that.
Consciously?
Sorry.
Do you have a different experience?
Hmm?
Speak a little bit.
I've never felt that way before.
I almost always feel that way in my dreams.
I feel that way right before, like if I, so I've had some dreams where I don't see another
person, there's no one else, and then I've had them where I'm just alone.
But the ones where I do have someone else, I always feel like that towards, I feel like
I wake up like shortly after that.
So, who here's a lucid dreamer?
Used to be.
Used to be?
Yeah.
Or can lucid dream sometimes?
Or knows when they're dreaming?
I know when I'm dreaming.
Okay.
So, you've got...
Yeah.
You know the spectrum.
I used to be able to smell my dreams too.
Hmm?
I mean, I could smell smells in my dream.
Did you lose the ability to smell?
Yeah.
Okay.
Sorry, I didn't bother you.
Well, it doesn't matter.
I mean, it's...
Well...
I've definitely tasted eating things in my dreams.
Do you, does anybody, you know, are you yourself in your dream or are you somebody else?
Have you experienced, you know, the perspective that you're in a dream?
You're another person entirely.
Yeah.
Either a real or fictional person or something that's an aesthetic like a shape or color or...
No.
Someone else, yeah.
Are there other people in the dream?
And if so, who's puppeteering those characters?
Yeah.
Who's writing their dialogue, essentially?
I've had dreams where like I'm talking to someone who doesn't speak English in real life,
but they're speaking English to me in the dream.
Yeah.
Would that not be a form like me imposing on them if they do?
I wonder what language do people speak in all of your dreams?
There was one dream where I spoke Japanese and I'm not fluent in it at all.
Do you know if it was correct Japanese?
Uh, it sounded like it.
Sounded like it.
But maybe it just triggered your...
That sounds like Japanese neurons.
Maybe.
It varies.
It varies.
Yeah.
Depending on what I'm dreaming about.
Either English or Russian.
Sometimes another language.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um...
Usually...
No, usually everybody's speaking English, but I also have a lot of agency in my dreams
that I could have something to do with it.
Do you ever have people speaking in a language that you don't understand?
Yeah.
At all?
Yeah.
In your dream?
Yeah.
I have it sometimes, but it's very, very...
Yeah.
Huh.
Interesting.
Well, how does this also relate to the things that we attribute agency to in, say, hallucinations
or after taking psychoactive compounds?
Or we attribute, you know, people will say there are these entities or things that people
are experiencing and interacting with and they'll say, this is pretty damn real, right?
I also would say there is some connection between that and the topomancy thing because,
you know, you would say this is technically to some degree inside your mind, right?
Whatever mind is.
And, you know, people have worked up the ability to, they'll say they can understand it, they
have a revelation, but as soon as they're no longer in that state, they're like, the letter
W, what did that mean?
That was the biggest insight I had in my life.
It was also clear at the time.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Which is, actually, there is this thing people talk about in psychedelics about false revelations
and stuff like that, right?
We're in that state, in that context that feels like, man, you really, you hit something.
This is giant.
You've changed.
This is it.
You're going to come out, you're going to change the world.
And then you're out of here like, what does this scribbling thing mean?
I thought this was it.
You know?
Are they false?
Huh?
Are they false if they're consistent?
I don't know.
Across people.
Across, yeah.
This is something I was going to bring up, actually, because I work for the National Institute
of Drug Abuse Monitoring online.
People that talk about drugs online, basically.
Not heroin.
Yeah, actually.
And so I, for my job, I read hundreds of comments from people every week.
That's fine.
And there's a lot of things that are consistent between at least people taking the same drug,
even if they hadn't heard of the thing before.
Yeah.
So like, every, maybe you've heard of machine elves with psilocybin.
Yeah.
But there's other ones with other drugs.
So people will intentionally take really large amounts of ibuprofen.
Yep.
Which you shouldn't do.
It will give you.
Don't do it.
It will give you Alzheimer's at like 40.
Don't do it.
But people do it.
They'll take like two bottles of ibuprofen or whatever.
And they'll, they'll see like this entity they call the hat man.
Oh, isn't that like Benadryl too?
Yeah.
I've heard a lot with Benadryl.
Don't do that either.
None of these things are made to take at that scale.
They will.
Don't do it.
I'm serious.
I'll tell you, I will tell you that other drugs are fine to do.
Don't do those.
Yeah.
I read about people who have like just complete, like are in a nursing home at 35 or 40 or something.
Yeah.
I know someone who did DMT and they said that they experienced themselves in a different lifetime,
like 40 years they lived in a different lifetime.
They had kids with somebody.
Sounds like Salvia.
Yeah.
They raised their kids and then they woke up like out of the trip and they faced a very deep depression
because they felt like they lost their family.
Uh huh.
And how is that, how is all that shit happening in here?
I don't know.
And to go back on like the figures that the DMT helps, what about like sleep paralysis?
Yeah.
Like a lot of people say, you know, they see the tall, dark man.
Yeah.
Like on the corner of their bed looking at them.
But that's not induced by psychoactive drugs.
That's just from sleeping.
I have sleep paralysis but never experienced that.
Really?
I experienced sleep paralysis during the day sometimes.
It's a pretty reoccurring thing about someone seeing like the tall shadow man.
It's awful.
I've seen it once.
You've seen it once?
Yeah.
Talking about sleep paralysis.
I am.
No.
Has anybody had recurring dreams?
Like the same dream or whatever?
Yeah.
Induced or not?
Non-induced.
Not induced.
Yes.
And I've had both.
Does it stay the same or does the ending change for you?
Doesn't change.
I have the same dream for like three years of my life when I was a child every single
night.
Oh my gosh.
That's how I learned to lose a dream.
Monday next fall.
It just decreased in frequency and then I haven't had it in years and years.
And then the dream wasn't anything super meaningful but it was the same exact dream every single
night for like a few years.
My mom told my doctor about it.
She was concerned about it.
I was like that's fine.
Did you recognize it?
Was this before or after you started lucid dreaming?
Yeah.
I always recognized that it was a dream and it was the same dream and everything.
I'm generally like completely aware during my sleep.
Like I was saying earlier like the transition from me sleeping, from me being awake to sleep
is like my attention moving to something else.
So there's not like a sharp transition.
And so when I was younger I had a lot of trouble like am I awake?
Is this a dream?
Like it was kind of hard.
Right?
You start to pick up okay this is like a dream.
This is like you know whatever.
But when I have tried substances in the past.
Don't do drugs kids.
You know when I have tried things in the past.
There's a very, it just feels like something that's naturally coming on.
Like there's a very smooth transition.
Like trust me I'll know like when you take you know a psychedelic in the time loop or something.
So okay you know that's happening.
But it's like it's like I'm watching it on a screen rather than I'm experiencing it.
But is that for every psychedelic you've tried?
Everything I've tried so far.
I have this response to everything that I've tried.
Now don't get me wrong.
I can still get you know one-shotted to a degree if I were to take enough right?
But there it's like the way I would describe it in my case is there's one foot in one foot out every time.
Through sleeping and dreaming, taking substances like it's like I'm there.
It's like okay I can get really you know if it's a really good move.
If it's a really good movie or song or whatever.
I can get very invested in that.
I can totally get zoned into that.
But I'm still aware and feel the fact that I'm watching that.
That's like how it is with sleeping and dreaming.
Like I'm very aware of when I go into paralysis for sleep.
Okay.
Yeah.
Like it's like I'm watching something.
One foot in one foot out.
Do you think it would be that way?
I don't know if you've tried certain but there are certain psychedelics where the experience so I've heard.
Is that it's very like DMT for example.
Yeah.
I haven't tried.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's very you do not know where like.
It's possible.
Yeah.
It's very possible.
You don't know that you're tripping on DMT?
You know.
You don't have any awareness of time.
You don't necessarily.
Not necessarily.
You're just like in it.
No.
I had.
Terrifying.
Not mine.
You're completely ripped from reality.
No.
The first.
And I think with like the other ones I've heard of.
I think like Salvia.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Has anybody ever taken something.
Thought they took something.
They thought they felt the effects of it but they never actually took the thing.
All right.
Now you.
Let's say you're.
You're smoking something.
You're doing whatever.
And you're like.
All right.
This is it.
You can start to feel the effects but then you realize.
Oh wait.
The thing wasn't on.
Or nothing actually came out.
Like placebo effect?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And yet you can still feel something.
Until I learned to recognize it.
Yeah.
I had the reverse placebo effect for a long time.
Interesting.
Where I was.
I was never convinced.
Yeah.
I was.
I was on anything and then I saw a video of myself.
One video of myself really drunk and one video of myself really high.
And I was like.
Oh my gosh.
That's a completely different experience than what I had going on inside my head.
I thought I was just.
I was like.
This isn't affecting me or anything.
And then I clearly from the video.
Something was affecting me.
Yeah.
I always try to record everything to make sure.
Yeah.
To see what the actual effects is.
Yeah.
I experienced that too.
I had a reverse placebo effect for a long, long time.
I was one of those really annoying drunk guys.
Like I'm not.
Can you self-induce it?
Huh?
Can you self-induce the effect?
I still don't.
I don't enjoy drinking or getting high because I still don't like feel anything internally.
I just clearly have something going on.
You're based on just the dabs?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I still feel like I'm just sitting here talking to y'all just like I am now.
And so I don't.
There's not like a buzz or anything that's really enjoyable.
You've got that endogenous buzz.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I have that same feeling.
I like the taste of beer and stuff but like I don't.
I just don't enjoy it a lot.
I don't have anything.
You have this pink Moscato right here.
That's an interesting theory of mine that reminds me of somewhere.
I think it was online, some kind of feed.
And the person did not believe that there were people who actually enjoyed the taste of beer.
They thought that they were just confabulating that and saying that because they liked the experience.
And it was like an interesting theory of mine.
They couldn't wrap their head around that some people would actually like beer.
Yeah.
I actually like beer and whiskey for my first time tasting them which from what I understand is very rare.
I blame it on growing up with Malta.
But.
With what?
Malta.
It's like a.
It's a Malta rich.
Oh Malta.
Yeah.
Malta.
It's like a bitter Cuban drink.
My grandma always had it at her house.
And people say it tastes kind of like beer.
There's also this soda called Malta I think.
That's what he's talking about.
Yeah.
Oh wait.
Wait.
Were you talking about a soda?
It's like halfway to a soda.
It's got some kind of carbonation but not as much as like a Coca Cola.
Oh.
It's kind of like Foss right?
Kind of.
I haven't tried that actually.
So.
I wouldn't know.
But.
At any rate.
My experience with alcohol is very uncharacteristic.
I have never enjoyed the buzz and always enjoyed the taste of it.
I don't know.
I'm the same way so I don't know if that's uncharacteristic.
Anyone else see one?
They like the taste?
Yes.
And not particularly the buzz.
I mean I just don't see the appeal of alcohol.
It's good.
Beer is good.
I'm wine guy.
It reminds me of earlier we were talking about with language and would the idea be to expand
language until it's sufficient to do something interesting or is it always going to be better
to have multiple languages.
Yeah.
In some weird girdle kind of paradox that any one language will have this kind of Swiss cheese
effect where it can't talk about itself.
Yeah.
And so it's going to always be better to have some other completely different language that
refer to the first one and it makes me think of these altered states that the other state
you're in is not particularly interesting per se.
It's just that now you have like a different vantage point to look back at your normal state.
Yeah.
Well like Godot's theorem thing, if I understand it correctly, which I probably don't, you could
create a circular logic system which is I think self-consistent.
Yeah.
Not be like self-preferential and stuff.
So you could make a language which is like that I suppose.
But it wouldn't be complete.
It would always have holes in it.
Okay.
I see.
Sorry.
No, go ahead.
Finish your thought.
If you understand it better than I do then chime in because I am not.
Well the trade off is consistency or completeness.
So you'll either have, you'll either be able to prove false statements is true.
In other words, you'll run your logic engine and eventually it will give you falsehoods
or there'll be sort of places on the map you just can't get to with logic.
And to be clear, you can have both inconsistency and completeness.
Right.
It's just that you can't have neither.
Right.
Does this, is this completeness in terms of not also being self-referential or like...
The requirement is, has nothing to do with self-reference.
Oh.
The requirement is just constructible.
You can have some kind of recurrence even if it's not necessarily recurrence.
There'll be true statements you can't prove that are true.
I think there might be a reason to have multiple languages aside from having languages that can talk about other languages.
Yeah.
If the no free lunch theorem applies to languages the same way it does algorithm where you can only optimize certain features and you have to do that at the cost of other features.
Right.
Then I'm at the point where I program in multiple languages.
And so I'll write some Python and then you can run like the Wolfram engine inside of Python.
And so I'll do that and then I'll run this R code.
And then I'll run this other code for my database because it's, I can get a much more compressed representation of what I'm trying to do in a different language depending on what I'm trying to do.
Right.
Like Creoles.
Yeah, yeah.
And I could see someone, I could see someone who was like a polyglot who knew like nine languages being able to talk about things easier if they could just switch between all of their languages.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's very true.
Okay.
Yeah, absolutely.
Wow, I've never had a hypothesis validated that quickly.
That was great.
That's funny.
I wonder though, actually going to that, right, if there is a certain bit rate, a certain amount of compression, wouldn't that compression be a limitation of the brain or whatever the person speaking is?
Doesn't that mean that someone who speaks nine languages speaks them somehow worse?
I, so the, you can get different compression indexes.
So you're universal.
So if what I'm talking about with the no free lunch theorem is true, this is part of something called algorithmic information theory.
Yes.
Which is the whole study of algorithms.
There's a lot there.
Y'all should go read the Wikipedia page, fascinating stuff.
But part of algorithmic information theory is different languages that you can represent algorithms in can compress different things at different rates.
But the universal sort of compression index remains the same no matter what.
That's part of the no free lunch theorem.
At the end of the day, right, if this is true, if one thing is true here, like this is an assumption, if you have to then transcode into some other language, then the compression rate of that other language would be your fundamental limitation, wouldn't it?
Yes.
What are your internal languages?
I'm saying if you do like a Creole thing, like he can do apparently, or I do with coding languages, where you don't transcode it, you just say, alright, I'm going to say this sentence in this language, and then this sentence in this other language, and then this sentence in this other language.
But then ultimately, like the runtime increases, if you will.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Does the runtime in your brain increase, and does that cause a limitation?
When you have more languages, that means you have to have more interpreters.
Maybe it all evens out.
I don't know.
So with these large language models that can translate between all the major human languages, there's this idea of like a word vector, but it's actually representing concepts like apples and tables and beef jerky in like this weird space, and then when you try to translate it, it finds like the closest in whatever language you're looking for.
I think it'd be interesting if we could go in and look at those vector spaces, and as things like the lost language of paradise, are they in there?
Right?
Can we go back in like sort of the Tower of Babel kind of sense?
Can we teach it every language on the planet?
Let's do it.
What's the final thing to do?
And then have it, and then have it swine like this like pure, you know.
What that boundary looks like is actually kind of interesting.
Like that's some of the stuff I'm working on.
Yeah.
And it's, I don't know how much of it is inherent to the problem and how much of it is just can't find a stable solution, but it's a little chaotic.
I mean, it's a scale.
I have a whole thing, and I won't get into it fully here, but there's a video getting uploaded on his channel where I talk about some of this, but I think that vector and that sort of hyper-dimensional representation can represent language, but it can't represent knowledge.
And so, I'll put that here and then we can get back to talking about whatever this is.
Yeah.
And if you're watching this video in the future, I guess you should watch the other video in this channel.
I think, I am interested though about this, the way that we use these minimal representations or models to control things, right?
So let's say you're in a car, right?
You don't necessarily have to know how every aspect of the car works to use the car.
You know, if you're in an automatic, okay, you put your foot on the gas or the brake, you have the thing that goes into drive, park, whatever, and then the steering wheel.
And that's basically it in order to move the car.
But what is interesting though, is that as you're trying to test the car more, right, and test it under different contexts and circumstances, you will start to have to learn more in order to maintain the use of that car, right?
And it's as simple as, okay, well, you want to keep pushing your car for longer distances, you're going to have to start to learn a little bit of how the engine and the transmission works if you don't want it to break down.
Or it could be as simple as, you know, you're trying to go drift and eventually your tires will wear out and you have to learn about a little bit, at least about how the tires and the rims and whatever works and how to replace that.
And as you test the system more and more, it's like you're getting to know more, it's like testing is measuring and identifying different aspects of the system, right?
And so I wonder what that looks like for language, the way that we test language, right?
How do we use language?
It's like saying like, you know, why is it we can even say there is an unknown unknown?
We can't, we don't actually have that in front of us, but we can say there is an unknown unknown and we kind of know what it means, what it represents, why is that?
Sofia Vergara, I watched an interview with her, or that she was in, right?
And it was, she said that a lot of times when she speaks in English, she doesn't really know that what she's saying is correct or incorrect.
She just waits for the other person's facial expression and body language to tell her if she got it right or not.
Okay.
But in a lot of ways she said that she doesn't, sometimes she doesn't even know what she's saying, she's just waiting for like the feedback.
But is that always true?
Yeah.
Are we always doing that to some extent?
Maybe to some degree.
It doesn't matter how good you are at reading that feedback?
I mean, think of how useful it is, they talk about in computer programming, the rubber duck debugging.
When you have a problem with a computer code, you just like explain your code to a rubber duck.
Because just the act of verbalizing it like nine out of ten times can help you solve that problem.
Yeah.
So maybe it's like we're all kind of on that scale that we're making up stuff and then we have to hear it ourselves to even know what it is that we were saying.
Yeah, and I think we all look for feedback also to sort of validate that we got our point across even before the other person says if they got it or not.
But even from ourselves in a sense.
Yeah.
I think in my experience a lot of the time it doesn't go across.
Yeah.
And I'll either misread feedback or get feedback that says it did go across and what went across was completely different.
Yeah.
Yeah, because you have to be able to interpret and understand what the reward or the feedback is, the reward, the punishment, the feedback, whatever it is, right?
Do you ever witness a misunderstanding?
Yes.
Someone says something and someone else heard something and you could perceive that like, no, they didn't hear the right thing.
Yeah.
Right?
How often does that happen to you but you didn't notice?
Probably all the time.
Non-stop.
Right.
Probably most of the time in some weird sense, right?
Yeah.
I also think we misuse words probably a lot more than we recognize because I'll notice other people using a word that's similar but not actually the right word.
And, you know, I notice it, I just don't say anything.
Yeah.
So I'm assuming that other people recognize when I do it and they just don't say anything.
But it's still, because they still got the point. They still got the idea based on the context and...
Yeah.
When I catch something like that I tend to point it out because I'm concerned that I misunderstood.
Mm-hmm.
Because a lot of the time there's just a huge misunderstanding there.
Sometimes it's...
Do you think there are certain circumstances where a misunderstanding is a good thing?
Yes.
There you go.
Maybe ambiguity.
Yeah.
Maybe not misunderstanding, but ambiguity.
Yeah.
Ambiguity is a good thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Ambiguity is kind of a necessary feature for languages to be useful for compression.
Because the number of symbols you have to describe a thing have to be less than the total number of things you want to describe about a thing or else it's not useful.
Also from like a functional perspective, ambiguity is what leads to new things.
Yeah.
Right.
Well Hilbert Hilbert said when rigor enters meaning is lost.
Yeah.
That it's the flexibility in our understanding which actually weirdly supports the meaning.
Right.
Well that's how a lot of advertising works.
Yeah.
Yeah.
A lot of times it'll be something controversial but only the people who recognize it and get it.
Like the...
It's like an inside joke.
Yeah.
Oh.
And then anyone else wouldn't really recognize that it was maybe edgy or different.
No.
Like conceptually not what it looks like.
Yeah.
Look at like Alice in Wonderland.
Or look at our conversation today.
If somebody who wasn't in the know walked in and heard all this.
Same thing.
I made a joke at MindFest last year.
I said if somebody walked in and heard us talking about all this stuff they'd think we all just
took a giant edible and sort of...
That sound like...
You were there.
Oh that's what the chomps are.
Yeah.
Oh.
They figured it out.
Still sponsors.
Anyway.
Um.
But yeah.
It is kind of interesting though.
Right?
Like...
I think...
And this is why like the...
The arts in general I think at least on sort of...
They keep it less in the background in the zeitgeist in a sense.
Right?
But you know people as an artist you're often said okay you should try to look at things in
different ways constantly.
Right?
Like when you're like you know if you're making a song you don't want every single
track to be exactly the same.
Maybe you'll have some pattern but a lot of the time as an exercise for building your
skills whether it's drawing, painting, producing an instrumental, whatever.
You're supposed to keep changing it up each time.
Right?
And so like an artist you know a normal...
You know somebody who's maybe a little bit more into you know more rigidly describing
things would have a very specific way of describing that bottle.
The artist would talk about all the other different ways it could be represented and then maybe
try to find a connection between those representations.
Right?
So I think it's interesting when you think about the way you represent information and its ambiguity.
Right?
You know I think...
Have any of you tried to like listen to like white noise and try to hear a sound or a song
or a beat inside of it.
Well what about like those Spongebob repeating a sentence of like a sound for 10 hours and
actually start hearing words.
Yeah.
It's the same thing.
It's the same thing.
It's the same thing as also being able to you know look at you know clouds and see faces
or you're looking at like the particles on the you know the little tiny stones and rocks
and whatever on the ground and these tiny things and seeing you can shape it out.
Like right if you know if you look at like the cloth on your clothes or whatever if you
try hard enough you can start to see okay that's a circle I can see a triangle.
And if you get really good at this you can start to almost see a face.
So the chomps are kicking in.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
But there's actually something called a casino or fire casino meditation or something right
so people say they'll look at this very kind of dim candle or you know they will you know
look at something and then focus on the after image and under those phosphenes and those dots
and things that they're seeing you know when their eyes are closed they'll try to eventually
spend a bunch of time to construct this into like a very vivid real life image.
Right.
And I think it's the same thing without the way your mind is processing ambiguity and the
white noise or the SpongeBob you know voice thing.
Right.
Yeah.
And it's also interesting that like as something repeats you start to hear it less.
Right.
And something fun to try would be like alright let's say you put on a thing of white noise
right now.
Right.
And like what naturally sticks out to you based on the setting you're in right now.
And then what else can you induce out of that.
Has anybody tried that before?
I've tried it with visual white noise.
Yeah.
Have you ever heard of a prisoner's theater?
I've done maps.
It's where you place like a slightly crinkled piece of paper in front of your eyes and you
just lay down without anything else.
Yeah.
You can do that with golf balls right when you cut the thing I think you can do something.
Ping pong.
Or ping pong balls yeah.
I didn't know that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This kind of reminds me of like when some people close their eyes they see images.
Yeah.
That aren't there.
I think it's worth our attention to figure out why it is we create you can create these
experiences other things that we consider to be kind of ambiguous because you know when
you're coming into the world for the first time a lot of this stuff is going to be ambiguous
too.
Mm-hmm.
Right.
Is your sense of self ambiguous?
You have to learn it.
How do you learn it?
And how do you how do you even know what is a reward or feedback?
Or feedback.
Yeah.
It's it's and you do have to have that sense of self to separate yourself from the object
in front of you because in a sense you have to know where your boundaries know where the
other thing is and the other thing also defines where your boundaries like remember
if you're using your eyes to see you're not actually seeing your eyes directly.
Right.
That was an interesting thing that Bruce Hood talks about in that video that I mentioned
it's called the self illusion and when your eyes move when they saccade they actually
disconnect so that you don't get like a blurry streak.
Yeah.
And so that means when you think about how often your eyes are moving throughout the
day all together if you would add that time it was about two and a half hours a day that
you're effectively completely blind but we don't notice this we just kind of we just fill
that in and the interesting example he gives and you can you can try this later go look in the
bathroom mirror and look at one eye and then look at the other eye.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then look back at the first eye.
You don't see your eyes move.
Yeah.
You're just your perception just goes from one eye steady to the other eye steady.
Yeah.
But then go watch someone else do this you know watch as a spectator and you'll see their
eyes move no problem as they switch from looking at one eye to the other and it's just
really neat that we don't perceive that at all.
Or do it like with your phone and take a video of it.
Yeah.
So it's two and a half hours every day that we're completely disconnected from reality
but we're just in paints this like illusion of continuity.
When you say disconnected you talk about visually disconnected from reality.
Yeah like the signals just turn off right.
What's interesting is there's an alternate way and I think like reptiles or something do
it where you can have when you saccade one eye move and not the other and then the other
moves and that way you can stay connected.
But we don't.
Humans don't.
Iguanas do that?
Or chameleons.
I think it's chameleons actually.
It's one of the reptiles though.
Yeah.
One of the ones with legs not a snake.
That narrowed it down.
It reminds me they put a camera on a chicken's head and then like put it on like a boat.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And like the chicken's head is incredibly stabilized.
Yeah.
Right.
The whole body moves but the head just kind of stays.
In a sense to make use of things you need to have a sense of continuity.
Right.
You kind of are always doing that to string together when your hand is moving if you're
here or whatever else.
Right.
But it's an illusion.
In a sense it's an illusion.
The person you were yesterday.
Yeah.
That you'll be the same person tomorrow.
It's true.
These aren't really true.
Right.
I mean the sense of self there are like certain disorders that are characterized by a lack
of it.
But like what language do we even use to describe what your sense of self is today and is there
any way to compare that to what it would be next week because is there even a language
to describe your sense of self?
It seems like English isn't that good for that.
How would, how, how would it, is there a language that looks good for that?
I don't know.
I think English is actually great for that.
I'm so sorry I'm being so contrary to that.
This is perfect.
This is perfect.
This is what we need.
This spices things up.
Please.
Be as contrarian as you want.
I'm a defender of English because it's a, a lot of people hate on English and a lot
of the arguments people have for English is a lot of the same arguments people have
against Python, like the programming language.
They're like, it's only kind of alright at everything.
Yeah.
But I think that's the same thing that makes English really good is it's, uh, it's extensible
and customizable.
So like there, we don't have words in English to talk about.
You lack a sense of self, but you can build that out really easily in English because the,
the rules are so flexible and you can't do that with more formal languages.
Or it's harder.
You, you, you can do it, but it's harder, but I could be like, I am going to make up a
new word for my sense of self on this particular day and not talking about my sense of self
yesterday or tomorrow.
And that word is blue block.
And like, I just like carved myself out a new piece of English to be used.
That's so blue block.
Doesn't German do that a lot?
Well, not in that sense, but like constantly building longer and longer words.
German does it compositionally though.
Yeah.
Which is, it's different and it's less useful and that's how you end up with 27 syllable
words in German.
I think, I think English's way of doing it of saying, here's a word, here's a definition.
I just made the word up.
I like the extensibility idea.
It's like the colon operator in fourth.
But what would the definition of blue block be?
Like what would your definition or your sense of self on a specific day be so that it's
something that you understand the word.
Maybe someone else can even understand the word.
And next week, you know exactly what you meant when you said that.
What do you, what do you mean?
Like if it's to refer back to, right?
In terms of knowing what it means each week, then how do you know if you, can you define
your sense of self with a string of words as a definition and then assign that to a word?
Or do we just not have a way to describe a sense of self?
No, when I said, when I said blue block, I meant in this current moment, my sense of
self.
But you could come up with another word for my sense of self.
Do you think other languages can't do that?
No.
I think other languages can't do it as easy.
They have to do it compositionally like German, which is not ideal because you end up
with 27 syllable words and then your compression rate isn't great.
Or it's really hard to define new vocabulary from what I understand.
But you can correct me.
And languages like Chinese, because there's so many rules that you have to work with then,
where English is pretty loosey goosey.
So, that was an example where you literally just said loosey goosey.
You can do that with words and kind of substantiate a new vocabulary.
That's a synonym for flexible.
I'm not saying English is the only language that can do that.
No, I'm saying Russian, Italian, Spanish, it's doable.
But the one thing though that English does have is it's a lot more flexible, although
feels awkward with syntax.
Like if you look at how English evolves, we see all sorts of weird things getting added
into our syntax.
Oh yeah, this is the problem with having an extensible, customizable language.
This is the same problem with Python.
It's like every Python library uses a slightly different syntax to get things done.
Python frustrates the living daylights out of me because it doesn't have a very extensible
syntax.
Oh, I think it does actually.
Compared to something like...
Not like Lisp.
Or Forth.
Yeah.
Where the syntax is completely flexible.
For a long time, it didn't have switch case.
And you couldn't just add that.
There was like a language like Forth, you could just kind of define that pretty quickly.
Oh.
Or even JavaScript has a much more flexible syntax to type on.
Yeah.
Yeah, I don't know if it's the syntax that's flexible or like the system of types is very
flexible.
flexible.
No, even typed, it still has a more flexible syntax.
Do people think if human languages and machine languages will mix together?
Or will they always just be totally separate things?
Well, I mean, if you look at like the user interface for let's say a website, isn't that
like an intermediary between the machine language and the human language?
Or maybe like, I guess if you were to like what OpenAI is thinking about with AI agents, where
you input your human speech, and then it goes into the operating system through that intermediary.
That is like, it's not a combination.
Well, yeah, it is a combination if you think of the whole thing, but it's an intermediary
that creates it.
I think until the hardware is the same, they're going to have to have an intermediary though.
And the hardware being the same, there's like a startup where you can run computing on cerebral
organoids and maybe we'll get there.
But like, because the hardware is different, that means the machine language is different.
And so like the machine language for a computer with the x86 processor is like some combination
of something and assembly.
And the machine language for humans is like some sort of electrical signals.
And I think you're going to naturally have to have different abstracted high level languages
to work with those two types of hardware.
And so yeah, I think you're always going to have to translate between them until we get, you know.
So in the Dune universe, there's no computers, right?
And they've trained humans to sort of do computation in their head.
Do y'all think that's possible?
Say we had a couple thousand years of economic motivation to do so.
Would that be possible?
Could we make human computers?
Would we want to?
So you would maybe just select for people who are good at that?
I'm not sure if we could be trained.
For economic reasons, then the ones who couldn't do it would just die.
I think it might be possible to make some kind of drug which makes the brain extremely like plastic.
And you could do that and maybe do some stuff to optimize like structure.
I think it might be like technically possible.
Although doing so without like computers and technology would probably be attractively difficult, I guess.
Technically possible and incentivize are two different things.
Technically possible, yes.
Incentivize, I think computers are already good at these more explicit types of computations.
And I think we'll probably just continue.
You would think of humans doing like speed runs or something really technical or fine motor behavior.
There's a fundamental limitation to how humans scale.
We have, language is a huge bottleneck.
Versus computers it's far easier to get around that bottleneck.
It's easier to string chips together.
Because we can just make them bigger.
And obviously you still do have that interconnect bottleneck and things do have to actually be changed.
But it's nowhere near as constrictive as language.
Yeah, humans are anywhere close to the thermodynamic limit.
This is another example.
Like imagine like ChatGPT or DeepSeq.
And you told the programmers that you have to get that done in the basic computer language.
Right?
An older language from the 70s and 80s.
It's theoretically possible.
But the programmers would kind of pull their hair out.
It's not an efficient way to do it.
Do we think that natural languages are good enough?
Like are we going to see improvements in English and Spanish and French and Chinese and so on over the next hundred years?
Have there already been improvements in English from a hundred years ago?
Right.
What do you mean improvements?
There's huge changes in English.
Yeah.
Especially over the last...
Yeah, but not just genetic drift.
Like is it more efficient?
Yeah, more efficient or more practical.
Look at modern English.
It's shorter.
We simplified grammar quite significantly.
You mean brain rot?
We're getting very close to getting rid of personal pronouns.
We are using, right, shorter symbols.
Like look at text speak.
Yeah.
Right?
We've reduced the reliance on certain punctuation in certain word order forms.
We've actually made more use of changing the order of two words in order to have a form of emphasis.
So, if you consider that improvements, then there's tons.
Definitely adaptations to the world that exist.
I don't know.
Maybe improvements, but I think language always has to change for the ways the world is changing.
Netiquette wasn't a word 100 years ago, probably, but...
And I didn't know it was like a definition word until I was doing it on the spelling bee this morning.
But it's a word.
What's the word?
Netiquette.
Like etiquette online.
Huh.
Netiquette.
Science wasn't a word until like 500 years ago.
Super recent in human history.
I mean, it's not...
Yeah.
But it's not an English word.
That's a borrowed word.
It was a word in Latin for a long time.
All of ours are.
That's the nice thing about having an extensible, customizable language.
Yeah, all of our words are borrowed words.
A lot of them.
Yeah, some like 74%, right?
But to the idea that English is sufficient enough, then why is it then when we look at medicine and law, right,
20% of that education is just going and learning Greek and Latin?
I don't...
I think we can do, like, astronomically better than English.
I think when we understand languages enough, we might be able to create, like, neural networks that...
or AIs which will create better languages for us to use instead.
And that will be the future of languages.
Right.
Actually, what you were saying there is interesting because there is a large shift, at least in law, towards plain language.
And there's, right, it's taken long enough.
But now, at least in the U.S., courts are encouraging plain language.
Supreme Court opinions are being written with more modern grammar.
Use of Latin phrases is highly discouraged in the amount of specialized terms of artists going down,
which for the most part makes it more readable.
Although, you still have the issue of specific things which now get generic terms and mean specific things.
The same thing is happening with...
My dissertation works with anatomy ontologies.
And the same thing is happening with anatomy ontologies and biology.
So what we call different parts of an organism's body.
It's moving away.
Not to natural language, because you can't have natural language for some of these things, really.
But it's moving away from Latin to sort of its own language.
And the language is compositional in such a way that I can say this thing is these three words
and you can kind of understand what I mean and where that's situated and what that means for its function.
Right.
I thought this was an issue in brain science because you have all these terms that, as a layperson,
you think are some sort of rich, you know, context or meaning behind it.
But if you translate an anatomy textbook, it's like, oh, the seahorse and the peach pit and the almond and the black stuff and the outer rind.
Like it sounds like a fourth graders coloring book.
And you realize like, oh, wow, there's not a whole lot to this.
They're just calling that the seahorse.
And I think putting those into regular language would expose sort of the infant state that brain science is in,
that we're still just kind of cataloging the shapes of things in a very childish way.
But it's also a problem because then it leads to misunderstanding.
Right.
It's that ambiguity, which allows more people to be able to get an understanding of it.
Yeah.
But also creates a two directional misunderstanding.
Right.
Once people start saying, say, reason to believe.
Right.
Once that becomes a phrase that's drilled into you through your law school education, it starts to mean a series of specific elements that in plain English it just doesn't.
Right.
Right.
Versus when you say something like res ipsa, since to most people that doesn't mean anything.
Right.
In fact, it just means itself, the thing itself.
Right.
It's from res ipsa loquitur, which means, right, if the thing for itself speaks, literally translated.
So that phrase doesn't mean anything to most people.
So to associate that with a series of technical definitions and elements that need to be shown doesn't confuse people in the same way.
Mm-hmm.
I don't think that's present in, say, anatomy.
No.
In anatomy that's still new words, it'll just be like the medullar cerebral peduncle or something like that.
Mm-hmm.
Which still has a little bit of Latin, by the way, in a medulla.
Yeah.
But it's more about choosing a set of, a good set of, like, base vocabulary and then composing meaning from that.
And that's what, uh, humans, human anatomy is not anywhere near it because doctors work with human anatomy.
So you have to change a whole other field besides science.
But, like, Drosophila anatomy or fruit flies or, like, macaque anatomy or zebrafish anatomy, which are all use, uh, organisms used in science are all moving away from Latin.
Mm-hmm.
Because eventually we're going to need to describe things for which there are no words.
Yep.
We're just going to need some kind of other, other blueprint type mechanism.
It's true.
There's too many pieces.
It seems the death of registers.
It's like how you talk to, like, your, your teacher or a judge versus how you talk to your peers.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
And in, in some languages, registers are very strict and very distinct.
Sure.
Mm-hmm.
Right?
Um, so, Korean has seven.
Mm-hmm.
And they're all distinct and, like, the highest register is pretty much a different language.
Mm-hmm.
Which...
Is that cursive?
No.
It's not really being taught anymore.
It's not a matter of being taught.
The registers are not being used.
They're...
The kids don't know cursive anymore.
That's true.
They're also losing their spelling ability because of spell check.
But that's not the...
But those don't lose actual semantics.
Right?
Linguistic register carries actual meaning.
It carries meaning about a relationship, an opinion of a person, right?
And that entire thing is getting lost.
Well, the relationships are changing.
Right.
Is the language changing or the social structure is changing?
The social structure is changing.
Is it?
Well, in Cambodia, they had the different levels of language as Korea.
But then they had Pol Pot and language changed.
I mean, sudden...suddenly.
But what follows what?
Is it that the social changes follow the linguistic changes or the linguistic changes follow the social?
I say the social changes start first.
And then language follows the social change.
But they're definitely going to be tightly coupled.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
If you look at, say, language reform in the Soviet Union, though, we can clearly see an example of how changes in language created a change in societal views.
Wasn't society ready for those changes?
Ready for them.
But the...
Maybe demanding them.
Would the language have changed if society wasn't already actively in a state where it was about to change?
Well, this has been a great discussion.
Yes.
Thanks, Eddie, for kicking this off.
Of course.
We're going to do more.
We're going to cover more topics.
I did want to get into the fermented cannabis discussion.
That'll have to be for another one.
