Hi, my name is Michael Ostroff, and I'm a PhD physics student at FAU.
I am also a member of FAU's MPCR lab, and around last year, I was having a conversation with one of the professors in my lab,
a philosophy professor by the name of Dr. Snyder.
So, she was wondering about, we were talking about the Fermi paradox together,
and she was wondering if perhaps aliens could potentially be utilizing extra-dimensional spaces in some capacity.
And I was thinking about that for a while, like the idea stuck with me,
because in order for like that to be possible, and like aliens be utilizing like higher-dimensional spaces,
like maybe like five or seven, seven like dimensional spaces or whatnot, we didn't go into numbers,
but in order for them to be doing that, those higher-dimensional spaces, or like space-times,
they would have to be coexisting with our current lower-dimensional space-time, like over where we are,
and I was trying to figure out how that could possibly like work in theory,
and that's when I realized something.
You know what wormholes like to do in general relativity?
They like to collapse in on themselves.
Imagine you're in a, like you're in a wormhole,
and somebody throws like a bunch of matter into its throat or something,
and now it starts going and collapsing in on itself.
So what happens is, you have like the throats, like the throat space-time,
which is essentially these, um, real, um, like extended dimensions, um, producted with a compact space,
and if you were to have something like a, um, a two-torus, um, compact, or,
okay, if the cross-sectional topology of the wormhole was something like a, um, two-torus,
then if you were to like, um, be over here, you could like go off the edge over here,
and wrap back around over here,
and same if you were to go up here, and you'd come wrap around like this.
And if the wormhole's cross-sectional, if the wormhole was collapsing in on itself,
this, um, two-torus, it would get through to shrink and get smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller
until it's like astronomically small.
And in general relativity, there's this thing called the RECI tensor.
The RECI tensor tells you how, like, um, dust clouds essentially change in hypervolume
as they move along, like, geodesics.
And in a vacuum, where the RECI tensor vanishes, i.e. it's all zeros,
the, a dust cloud, it should not change in hypervolume.
Its hypervolume should essentially stay constant over its time evolution.
So, if you were to have a dust cloud in this, um, collapsing wormhole,
then as the cross-sectional topology shrinks and collapses in on itself,
the, um, like, the perpendicular extended dimensions,
like the, um, time dimension and the, um, longitudinal dimension of the wormhole sprow,
those both need to expand in, like, um, in order to make the, um, dust cloud's hypervolume constant.
And essentially, when this occurs, the wormhole's rope becomes, like, extremely long and extremely narrow.
And eventually, um, you can, the wormhole's, like, cross-sectional topology,
it becomes, like, so small that it's essentially, like, astronomically small.
It's, like, practically infinitesimal, but not quite infinitesimal.
And when this happens, you can say, like, that the cross-sectional topology of the wormhole has collapsed,
and now it's, like, um, a compact space, like you might find in something called Kaluza-Klein theory.
So, I mean, compact spaces don't have to be, like, like, mac, like, microscopic and, like, um, astronomically small,
but in Kaluza-Klein theory, um, you're kind of assuming that they are.
And these, um, when, like, you have this, okay, so,
I should go into the history of Kaluza-Klein, um, theory real quick.
Or not history, but I'm just going into how it works.
So, in Kaluza-Klein theory, um, like, there's this, like, a 5D version of it,
which is, like, the original, where you have, like, our normal 4D Minkowski space-time,
and you product that with a 1-sphere, which is essentially a, uh, manifold, which is, like, a circle.
If you, like, just, like, go around it, you come back to your starting point, essentially.
It's, like, very, and the idea is that, um, with one of these, which is, like, really small,
like, um, astronomically small, it's producted with, like, our Minkowski space-time,
and this gives rise to a gauge field via the Kaluza-Klein mechanism,
which, um, in this gauge field is going to be, like, the U1, um, like, field,
which is, like, electromagnetism.
And, essentially, like, via, like, this Kaluza-Klein mechanism,
you can get, like, these sorts of, like, gauge fields, um, from just, like, vacuum,
higher-dimensional vacuum GR.
Anyways, when you have a wormhole and it collapses in on itself,
it should, um, start to gain, like, these gauge fields via this Kaluza-Klein mechanism,
depending on, like, the topology of the compact space,
and it's, like, killing vector fields.
And once this collapse has occurred,
the dimensionality of the, um, wormhole sprout
it is reduced by the dimensionality of the, um,
the wormhole's cross-sectional topology.
In, um, the case of that, um, two-torus,
that is a reduction in, by, like, two spatial dimensions,
and you were left with a, um,
essentially a one-plus-one-dimensional space-time
with a, um, well, it's technically two, like, new, like,
electromagnetic fields in the case of, like, a, um, two-torus.
But if you were to have, like, the cross-sectional topology
be a two-sphere instead,
which is just, like, the surface of, like, a ball, essentially,
then that would result in the creation of a, um,
SU2 gauge field,
which is also an SO3 gauge field,
which is essentially the group of rotations
of, like, an object in, like, three-dimensional space.
Anyways, um,
this made me realize that
the dimensionality in general relativity,
it's not exactly a fixed, um, like, thing.
You could have a extremely high-dimensional space-time
and have, like, a wormhole, like, in it,
and that wormhole could then go and collapse,
and upon that, like, collapse occurring,
you now have a lower-dimensional space-time
with, like, um, some Kaluzacline gauge fields present.
Um, so I'm calling these, like, weird structures,
which are able to change the dimensionality
of space-time itself,
I'm calling them dimensional collapsars
because, well, they collapse dimensions.
Um, and I noticed something, like, um,
like a year ago, um,
after I, like, came back from the Wolfram, like, summer school,
um, I realized that, um, an interesting, like,
feature of these, like, dimensional collapsars,
when they're, like, collapsing,
I'm expecting it to be, like, this, like, um,
violent and extreme collapse,
and because, like, the collapse of this, um, wormhole,
um, or dimensional collapsar,
it fuels the expansion of the extended dimensions.
And this looks very, very, very similar,
or at least it sounds very, very similar,
to inflation.
And that is, like, this theory that
in, like, um, the very early moments of our universe,
it underwent, like, drastic, um, expansion,
um, before, like, it slowed down a lot
for whatever reason.
So, when you have this, um, wormhole,
which is collapsing in on itself,
this, like, either, maybe it's, like,
a two-sphere wormhole, or it's a
two-torus wormhole, um, whatever it is,
when it's done collapsing,
you go from, the wormhole's
throat's, like, space-time
essentially goes from a three-plus-one
dimensional space-time
to a one-plus-one dimensional space-time
with, um, a two-dimensional,
like, compact space.
So, this is actually,
I think it's the formation of a new
lower-dimensional universe, essentially,
and that the collapse of this wormhole
is essentially the equivalent of
its Big Bang, and
for our universe, we know that
in its, like, very early moments,
it underwent, like, astronomical
expansion, which then, like,
um, slowed down for whatever reason,
and this, like, theory, it's commonly
referred to as inflation.
I suspect our universe is itself
a dimensional collapsar, and
when, either when it was forming, or maybe
when, like, some chunk of space-time
got sucked into our
dimensional collapsar's mouth,
that, that caused it to, like,
violently, like, collapse, essentially,
in, like, the, like, the extreme
manner, which, like, we would refer to as
inflation, because, because, like, the, um,
compact space, like, um, whatever it is
for our universe, I'm guessing it's
probably a, like, one sphere,
because it, um, collapsed so
drastically, the extended dimensions
expanded very drastically, um,
and inflated.
Um, so, yeah.
So, this essentially tells me that
dimensionality and general relativity,
we, like, we normally think about it as
this, like, fixed number, where if you,
like, look anywhere in, like,
GR, it's, like, like,
n-dimensional, and, like, if you look
everywhere else, it's still going to be
n-dimensional, but it seems that, like,
general relativity should have this, like,
property, um, where,
the topology of space-time is able to
change from, like, various different
points. So, you could have, um, a region
which is, like, Minkowski for, like, um,
30, like, dimensional, like, in, like,
a 30-dimensional space-time over here
with some, like, compact spaces, and then
in that 30-dimensional space-time, um,
a dimensional collapsor forms, like,
essentially there's a wormhole that
collapses in on itself, and then you
have a lower-dimensional, um, universe
which is created, um, from that
dimensional collapse, and it has, like,
some more additional gauge fields, and,
oh, by the way, in Kaluza-Klein theory,
the largest gauge field has the strongest, um,
coupling with the, um, effective stress-energy
tensor. So, if you were, I'm guessing that
the topology of, like, um, the compact
space of, like, the, or, I'm guessing
the, okay. So, the cross-sectional
topology of the wormhole, I'm guessing
whatever it is, that becomes a new
dominant gauge field in the universe
which gets created, and whatever was
previously the dominant gauge field, I'm
guessing it is, like, some, it's going
to be astronomically smaller than the
newly collapsed, um, topology, such that
you wouldn't really observe any other
gauge fields aside from that, um, new
one. Anyways, um, so, like, you should,
um, probably only have, like, at most
one dominant gauge field in every, um,
universe. Anyways, so, this, um, like,
30-dimensional, like, um, universe
essentially gives rise to a bunch of
lower-dimensional universes by having
dimensional collapsars pop into existence
inside of it, and these, um, lower
dimensional universes, they're still
going to be, like, high-dimensional, and
so, dimensional collapsars start forming
in them as well, and, um, you get, like,
more and more universes of, like, who
have, like, different topologies,
essentially, or dominant gauge fields, and
more and more dimensional collapsars keep
forming in those until eventually you get
down to, like, four dimensions, like, where
we are, um, plus, like, a bunch of other
compact spaces. So, I'm, I'm thinking that
this is, like, a general property of, like,
high-dimensional GR. It's sort of, like,
this, um, there's this notion of, like, um,
like, the curse and, like, blessings of,
like, dimensionality and, like, data science
where, like, if you, like, um, or in other,
like, complex systems where, um, like, the
properties, they sort of change as you move
into, like, extremely high-dimensional
spaces. I'm thinking that GR has, like,
these properties as well, and higher
dimensional spacetimes naturally give rise
to lower dimensional spacetimes, so we get
down to our level. And this begs the
question, what is the actual
dimensionality of this reality? Because
with that 30-dimensional example, um, you
could say that the dimensionality of that
entire spacetime is technically, like,
30-dimensional, even if, like, for places,
um, like, here, it, like, most of those
dimensions would be inconsequentially, like,
microscopic compact spaces, which don't
really influence our universe's dynamics.
The universe, like, it likes either very
small numbers or extremely large numbers
like infinity. And if you are going to
add, like, four is, like, a, four is, like,
a decent number of dimensions. It's not,
like, too high. But if you keep adding
dimensions, it starts to go from that, like,
fine range of lower numbers into an
awkward range of, like, um, maybe, like,
10 dimensions or, like, 24 dimensions. And
that's one of the reasons that people
don't really like string theory. They feel
it has, like, a lot of dimensions, but it's
not high enough that it's, like, um, becomes
more natural again. And I'm thinking that
the most natural dimensionality for
general relativity, like, like, with all
this in mind, is probably infinite
dimensional. Because if you had an
infinite dimensional space-time, like,
like an infinite dimensional manifold, it
should naturally give rise to, like,
dimensional collapsars, um, which give rise
to universes of all sorts of
dimensionalities, like, all the way down. And,
like, of all sorts of gauge fields. So, any,
like, sufficiently high dimensional, um,
reality should give, be able to give rise
to, like, many, many, many different
universes which have properties similar to
ours in terms of being four-dimensional
and having a, um, dominant, um, one-sphere
compact space. So, I've, like,
after, like, realizing all this, like, a, like, a
year ago or so, I created a, like, new
theory, which I refer to as, like,
dimensional collapsar theory. It's sort of,
okay, it is basically Calusa-Klein
theory, but, like, Calusa-Klein theory is
also general relativity, just, it's just
like vacuum GR, but it's just, like,
drawing attention to, like, compact spaces.
It's basically, like, general relativity,
but explicitly with compact spaces. So,
this dimensional collapsar theory of mine,
it's essentially, like, just, like,
vacuum GR and, like, Calusa-Klein theory,
but explicitly with dimensional
collapsars as well. So, it's not, like,
like, it's as much of a, like, um,
I'd say it's as much of a theory as, like,
Calusa-Klein is, I suppose. Um,
and I'll, I guess I'll leave that aspect
there. Um,
so, like, this, like, dimensional
collapsar theory essentially predicts, like,
this, like, infinite dimensional, like,
multiverse. And it's not, like, a
many-worlds interpretation multiverse,
because, like, each of these, like,
universes, they're, they exist in the same,
like, mathematical reality.
You could, in theory, if you had some, like,
warp drive, like,
travel outside the mouth of your
dimensional collapsar and visit another
dimensional collapsar and, like, maybe,
like, poke things in it with a stick or
something. I don't know. Um,
and, like, these other universes, which
you could travel to, they, like I said,
they have different, they can have
different dimensionalities and dominant
gauge fields, and they're not going to
be, like, a mirror copy of our own
universe. Like, they're just, they're
going to be a completely other universe.
Like, you could go a couple of, like,
universe is over, and you're not going
to find, like, a, um, another version
of yourself. It's just going to be
completely unique, essentially. So,
like, this is, like, the kind of
multiverse that general relativity
predicts. Um, and, like, I don't
think, um, people haven't, like, looked
into, like, wormholes, like, collapsing
before, it seems, because this seems,
like, I think this, like, should have
been, like, noticed sooner. Not entirely
sure how this was missed, per se. Um,
another, um, aspect of this
dimensional collapse error theory, um,
you remember when I was talking about
inflation and how, if the, um, like,
the, like, compact space were to
shrink, the extended dimensions were,
or would have to expand? I'm thinking
that this, um, inflation, it might not
have actually ended, and it might
still be going on, but it just slowed
down a lot. Because if this, um,
scaling compact, or if this compact
space, like this S1 in our case, were
to shrink a bit, then that would cause
our extended dimensions to expand a
bit. And this would look a lot like,
um, what dark energy looks like to us.
And if you were to look at the, um,
if you were to go to the Wikipedia page
for Kaluza-Klein theory, and you were
to, like, scroll all the way down to the
part where it's talking about, um, the,
like, Risi tensor and stuff like that,
you would notice that there's, um,
a component, like, a contribution to the
effective stress energy tensor, which
looks a lot like the contribution, um,
that dark energy makes, essentially. And
this is essentially, um, this contribution
is made by the dilaton field, which is,
like, another name for the size of the
compact space, um, shrinking,
essentially, over time. This would have
the same effect as, like, dark, uh, dark
energy, essentially. And I'm thinking
that there might be another, like,
potential effect here. Um, I'm thinking
that the size of the compact space
might set the size of, like, particles,
such as, like, Kaluza-Klein solitons. And
if the, like, compact space were to shrink,
then so would the size of particles. They
would, um, shrink in both, like, the
extent of space and time. Like, it's just a
hunch of mine. I haven't conclusively
proved this yet, um, but working towards
that. Um, and if that were the case, then
that would essentially exacerbate that, um,
like, uh, the effects of, uh, shrinking
compact space. Because now, like, the
particles themselves are actually
smaller. So, um, this, if this, like,
dimensional collapse, our theory of mine
is true, then it should at least have
predictions on how dark energy should
behave, which could govern, like, the
time of, which actually should cover the
time evolution of our universe. So, we
might be able to find observables
regarding this, but I'm not entirely
sure what the predictions are at this
point. So, I think that, like, wraps it
up for today. I would suggest that you,
like, um, take a look at my substack,
which is Perpetual Science. And, um, the
my, the same, like, by the same name, I
also have a channel on YouTube, which I
post videos onto. Um, not currently very
frequently. It's just some fractal related
videos so far, but, like, I'm planning
on putting more stuff on there
eventually. And I should, um, hopefully,
like, have more stuff on my substack, um,
like, soonish or laterish. Um, I should
probably put stuff up about, like, wormholes
and dimensional collapse, our theory as
well. That's a very important one. So, I
think that's it for today. Um, have a
great day. Bye.
