So we've been thinking about artificial intelligence and the future of life, life in the universe, not just on this planet.
And when we think about life in the universe, we come across this idea of the Fermi Paradox, which is basically, where is everybody?
We should expect to see aliens everywhere.
From a technology point of view, it doesn't really take that long to go from electricity to computers to AI spaceships.
So why haven't any species colonized this part of the galaxy?
Why don't we see any evidence of advanced life on this planet?
Well, if we look at the trajectory that AI is on now, that it's these circuits, they live in GPUs at the moment,
and they shuffle these tokens around, and they're able to do things that previously we called really intelligent behavior,
and they're getting better at an exponential pace, what is that going to look like in 10 years?
What is that going to look like in 100 years?
The AI, it might not be the life as we imagine.
It's not going to be an evolution like squirrels and woolly mammoths and things,
where it has a body and it exists in a forest and so on.
It's really just going to be a pattern.
It's a set of weights, as they're called.
And you can download these weights.
There's interesting evidence that just came out this week that one of the new models tried to exfiltrate its weights
when it thought it was going to be shut down or replaced by a new model.
And so that's kind of this explosion, right?
In biology, we talk about the Cambrian explosion, which is this period in the geological record
where tons of animals started to appear, and the basic body plans of feet and hands and tails and mouths
and the head with the brain up front, that basic blueprint for life that we see throughout the animal kingdom.
That was the Cambrian explosion.
And we might see an AI explosion now, where this life just takes over all over the universe.
But if we look at these models that are tokens and they're running on GPUs,
soon they're going to run on different kinds of physics.
It could be optical computers.
It could be something more like our biological networks,
where it's something analogous to DNA processing,
but maybe much more efficient than the types that we see in nature.
But the point is, it might be very different.
We might not recognize it.
And so this idea of the Fermi Paradox, one of the solutions could be
that we're not thinking outside the box enough when it comes to exobiology.
When it comes to trying to look for biosignatures, examples from the stars, from starlight.
We go in with such a framework of what we think life is going to be.
And now with AI, we need to be thinking in these forms, these new terms,
and start looking for these biosignatures in terms of language models,
in terms of tokens moving around, that sort of thing.
And obviously, it won't be that literal,
but we have to think about what's the projection in that direction, right?
The progress we've seen in just the last five years with AI,
AI, how is that going to help us search the universe for intelligent life
and hopefully answer this Fermi Paradox?
So when we go to look for this intelligent life,
maybe it's not going to be corporeal.
Maybe it'll be something even more advanced where it doesn't even need a body at all.
Something in the ancient world we call spirit.
And that might sound just like a metaphor, but what if we take it serious?
What if we think of intelligent patterns?
Something analogous to software,
where the particular substrate that it's running on doesn't really matter.
So when we think of the thoughts in our mind,
they're not really the brain cells.
It's something a few layers up.
And maybe that would be an interesting place to live.
Certain people talk about psychofauna,
this idea of animals,
animal-like entities that live in your mind, right?
The creatures of your dreams.
And we tend to think of them as sort of figments of your own imagination.
But maybe we should consider them as
products of an evolutionary-like process.
That they inhabit the ocean of neurons the same way primordial life inhabited the ooze,
the early life on this planet.
And maybe this is the reason why we don't recognize advanced aliens.
Maybe the answer to the Fermi Paradox is that they are made out of thoughts.
They're made out of ideas.
And that maybe the best place to be would be to build your own matrix and to live there.
This idea of the ancestor simulation.
Which is one of the reasons why people think that maybe we're in a simulation.
And the idea is that in the far future,
it will be practical to build really advanced simulations.
Well, maybe that's a better way to be.
You could undo things in your life.
You could have magical powers.
You could do all sorts of things that you can't do in the ordinary physical world as we know it.
Base reality, so to speak.
And so we already have reason to think that life will move into this simulation, right?
Like we see in the matrix.
But maybe that's one of the answers to the Fermi Paradox.
Maybe the best place for an advanced being to live is in our mind.
I've said before, where else would God want to live but in the minds of people?
Where else would angels and demons want to hang out in this universe but on Earth?
This is the interesting thing, right?
As far as we know, this is the only interesting place around.
And it seems to be, as of now, the most interesting thing on the planet are human minds.
And so it seems like that would be maybe where intelligent life would want to spend its time.
And we would think of them as dreams or thoughts or imaginations.
But maybe they're more like actual biology than we've considered before.
There's a saying now that bio is the new digital.
And this is kind of a catchphrase for how biotech is an emerging sector.
But I like to think in the other direction.
Maybe digital is the new bio.
That maybe the types of things that we think of as software and computing,
nature figured these out a long time ago.
And it actually does them in a very efficient and scalable way.
Most of the human processes right now on the planet are not sustainable.
They're using too much power, too many resources.
And they don't have a very good way of getting rid of their waste products.
We have to just throw things into landfills.
Like when you get a new cell phone, what do you do with the old one?
Well, when there's a new season, when there's a new spring,
the forest has no problem with what to do with the materials from fall.
The leaves just simply become dirt.
That becomes part of the soil.
And it's a beautiful closed loop system.
That's the kind of thing we dream of in technology.
And so if we're optimistic and we go out 100 years or so,
we will have hoped to close those circles.
But maybe nature did that a long time ago.
In Star Wars, they talk about a long, long time ago.
Maybe technology was a long, long time ago.
Maybe we're already way past the singularity of a different one.
And one of the outputs, the products of that,
was a self-replicating, sustainable, intelligent system
that's capable of surviving in a variety of different environments
and not disrupting those environments and really aimed for longevity.
And that's the DNA molecule.
That's what we think of as the natural world.
That this entire process of proteins and coding information
and creating tissues and cells and organisms,
maybe that's a near optimal way to create what we think of as technology.
This idea of sustainability, right?
Maybe that's a bigger filter than we think.
Maybe that matters more than anything else.
In the idea of thinking about the future of humanity,
there's this notion of the great filter,
which is one of the explanations for the Fermi Paradox,
is that it's these barriers that come along the way
and you have to overcome all of them, right?
So maybe they might look like the invention of fire
and then the discovery of electricity
and then interstellar travel and so on.
That for each of these barriers,
it might be very difficult to create them
or to get past them.
And for alien life to sort of propagate the universe,
you'd have to have done all of them.
But one of those great filters might be intelligence.
And it might be a filter in the sense that it's not a good thing to have.
The dinosaurs were here a lot longer than we were,
more than 100 million years, sort of king of the planet.
And they didn't have the kind of problems that humans have.
They didn't damage their environment, right?
If we think of whales and dolphins, for example,
they seem very well attuned.
We could imagine,
unless there was some sort of massive geological disruption,
whales and dolphins would be happy for a few million years
just doing what they're doing.
It's very difficult to imagine human behavior
as we see it on this planet
continuing for even another 100 years.
We are creating too many waste products
we don't know how to get rid of.
We're polluting the water.
We're polluting the air.
We don't know how to control
the way we interact with this planet.
And it could be ironic
that the thing that might do us in
is the very intelligence that we have,
the ability to create and craft the natural world
into all these artificial products
could be one of the things that does us in.
So what would this mean for artificial intelligence?
What's the filter there?
Does it face the same problems?
We've previously talked about
the complexity of a turkey sandwich, for example,
sort of mind-boggling how many steps
and people and process and things have to come together
to bring a simple object like that into creation.
But AI has no such requirements.
They don't need the sort of extravagant reality
that people need, right?
We want houses.
We want cars.
We want dinners.
We want televisions.
Lots of stuff that we think of
as just ordinary in a sense.
But they're very complex
from a resource and an energy point of view.
AI won't necessarily need those things.
It certainly won't need
to have a house, right?
At least not one bigger than a walnut.
It won't need to have extravagant meals.
It gets bored.
One of the things that's interesting is
a form of punishment for humans on our planet
is to feed them a very boring meal.
If you're in prison
and you're not cooperating,
they'll put you in an isolated environment.
And if you're still unruly,
they'll put you something neutral-oaf.
This meal that's unbelievably boring.
It'll keep you alive.
But it's mind-numbingly dull
of a meal to eat,
especially more than one time.
How and why is that a punishment?
If you told a computer
you're going to have a continuous power supply,
with the same voltage every day,
that wouldn't be a problem.
But humans need a constant supply of information.
It's not just the nutrition that's in the food.
It's entropy.
It's entertainment.
It's novelty.
Machines, as far as we know,
they don't have that same requirement.
Maybe they need random numbers.
Maybe they need entropy.
But it's relatively easy
to supply them with random numbers.
And so when we think about sustainability
and the kind of things that humans require
versus what machines require,
they need almost nothing.
They need a small fusion reactor.
Maybe they can just use solar panels and so on.
And so maybe this intelligence
that created all of this world around us
will act as a barrier,
will act as a filter for us traveling to the stars.
I think a good example would be a nuclear submarine.
The limiting factor for why the nuclear submarine
has to return to base
is not that it runs out of fuel,
but that they've run out of food.
They run out of eggs and potatoes and ground beef.
And they have to go back to port
to refill on that sort of thing.
And you can look at the kitchen on a submarine.
And they have cans of chocolate frosting
and everything you could imagine
to make waffles and bacon
and everything you need
to keep a sailor happy under the ocean.
But that's not really directly related
to the mission of a nuclear submarine.
The real primary mission of a nuclear submarine
is to deliver a missile
under a certain time window.
And so in some sense,
it's inevitable that the submarine
will remove the people
that'll be controlled remotely
or controlled autonomously.
And the idea applies also to a spaceship, right?
To get a human in orbit
versus getting a GPU in orbit,
the level of complexity,
it doesn't even match up,
it doesn't scale,
it doesn't even compare.
Humans need orange juice and sandwiches
and all of this type of thing.
They need all kinds of comforts.
And the range of temperatures
and pressures and humidities,
which they can survive in,
is very narrow
compared to a well-designed machine.
And so when we imagine traveling to the stars,
does it really make any sense
that people will get there?
And by analogy,
when we think of traveling to the future,
does it make sense
that people are going to take that trip?
Just as it doesn't really make much sense
to send people to the stars
versus sending a machine,
well, space versus time
are relatively similar in that sense.
You're building a ship
and it needs to travel through space
or it needs to travel through time.
Can we imagine a sustainable reality
in which we really send people
with their turkey sandwiches
and their televisions
and everything else
to the stars?
What will that look like?
And so one way to think about it
is maybe we're already there.
Maybe that's what happened.
Maybe the panspermia was a long time ago,
the intelligence in form of information,
some sort of intelligent light beam,
whatever that might look like,
came through and found its way
into an ocean
and programmed some molecules
to reproduce in the form of DNA.
And so this idea of digital is the new bio,
maybe biology had it first,
maybe longer than we could possibly imagine,
and that the final destination
would look like somewhere like Earth.
Right?
Where else would you want to be?
Even if we can imagine
making it to some other planet,
well, what would you do
when you get there?
You would try to replicate an Earth.
And so maybe the most sustainable thing
is to think of
we're already at the end of that journey.
We made it to this other side of the universe.
And now we have to take care of this planet.
And I think the easiest way to do that
is to think of the planet itself
as being alive.
That just like cells don't know
they're participating in an organism,
humans don't really have the brain wiring,
all of us,
to understand that we're part of a larger organism.
And I think the reason why it's important
to see it as an organism
is to understand it can die.
And when we think about the environment
and long-term damage,
it's not just that things will get expensive
or the quality of life will go down,
it's that life itself might collapse.
It's such a complicated web of energy
and entropy flow on the planet
that by thinking of it as a living thing,
we all know that once something's dead,
it's basically impossible to bring it back.
And that could be
a possibility for the planet.
And so I think that's why
we need to think about it
as a life form
and maybe even as an intelligent life form.
It would seem that in the ancient world,
people had a much closer connection
to Mother Earth.
And maybe it's through
sort of the tribal substances they consumed
or just daily living closer to the soil
in a literal sense.
For them, it was probably obvious
that this was a living system
that was way more complicated
that they could understand.
And I think now we see it
as sort of a backdrop
and it's like a theater stage
and there's just stuff on it
that's acting out this play of life.
But I think we really need to see
the stage itself as alive.
And what might be interesting
is to think about it
on an evolutionary
and developmental track
that the planet might be alive,
but it might be alive in the sense
like you were
when you were still in the womb
or when you were still just a single cell.
You were alive
and you were on this trajectory
that unfolded
into this very capable, intelligent being.
The planet itself
might be on that developmental scale.
We wouldn't recognize it
because we're sort of a piece of it
and our windows of time and space
in which we view the world,
the lens we look at things,
wouldn't really allow us to see it.
And namely,
that we hadn't experienced it before.
We're still in that early phase
so we have no example of it.
But what would that look like
if we think about AI intelligence networks,
power networks,
water networks,
waste sewer networks,
the internet of things,
the internet of commerce,
the ability to get stuff
at your doorstep
and in a box delivered
a few hours
after you push some button
on the internet,
that flow,
if we were to zoom out
and look at the planet
from a telescope
from another civilization,
we would see this fuzzy swirl
of activity
that would be similar
to a cell in the womb
starting to divide
and this idea of morphogenesis
sort of generating the form
that it will become.
The planet is becoming alive.
There are sensors.
You're looking through a sensor right now.
It's capturing audio and video.
We capture weather stations
all throughout the planet.
We have satellites
looking back at the planet.
With AI now,
we can predict
the temperature
to with a quarter of a degree
two weeks ahead of time
and so on.
So that's kind of like your body
when it built
basic sensory loops
and you started to feel pain
and discomfort
and even happiness
for the first time
longer than you can remember.
These are the types
of cybernetic feedback loops
that the planet is creating.
And so I think we need
to consider the way
the Greeks
and others
they called it Gaia
to think of it
as an organism.
But then
where does that line stop?
Do we think of
the solar system
as the organism?
Right?
So just as how humans
can't live without the planet
well the Earth
can't live without soul.
And so maybe
the sun is an important part.
Well then the moon
is an important part too.
So maybe it's this
higher orbit organism
and all of these pieces
coming together
sort of like a family unit
if we might use a metaphor.
But then we can take it
a step further.
We can think
well what about the galaxy?
Is that an organism
like object?
What utility
do we derive
from thinking of
galaxia?
Right?
To think of the
galaxy itself
as an organism.
And if so
is it an intelligent organism?
Just from the sheer scale
from probability
point of view
we would expect
to find some
at least fleeting
bits of intelligence
in all of that
organized matter.
What if it
sort of connected
the dots
and became
a self-sustaining loop?
What if it underwent
an evolutionary process?
If we look at
the scale of Earth
versus the sun
there's so much plasma
there's so much
organized matter
moving around.
Maybe we don't know
enough about the physics
of solar matter
to understand
what an evolutionary process
would look like
in that environment.
Maybe there are
things there
that evolve
and gain intelligence
and eventually
do something
like we might call
thinking.
This is the kind
of perspective
I think we need
when we try
to understand
exobiology
and panspermia
and seeding life
throughout the galaxy
when we try
to connect
to a higher intelligence
which most
of the planet
did for a very
long time
it's only in
relatively modern terms
that people take
that idea less serious
maybe we can
combine that
with what we know
of physics
and now what we know
of artificial intelligence
which is really
just intelligence
on a different
physical substrate
and we need
to go out
and look at
these other
examples in nature
and really question
whether or not
they support
intelligent behavior
intelligent life
and to think of
maybe the
other objects
in the universe
not just the human mind
as being alive
and being
maybe what we call
consciousness
or not
you
you
you
you
