Hi, everyone. I'm Matthew. There is Ali and Enhantra. We are team MathGuys.
So we're here to provide you a reinforcement learning for optimizing epigenetic reprogramming.
Our project is pretty similar to the project before. We were trying to use multi-omics data as well,
but we have a different approach. So we believe that there has not been any research that has done this before.
At least that we tried to search and we found none.
So in summary, we would like to use, sorry,
we would like to optimize the gene expression interventions using reinforcement learning on the multi-omics data.
If this project turns out to be successful, we can try to build an AI agent that can suggest the best kind of intervention for gene expression.
Next slide.
Many studies have indicated that epigenetic modifications regulate gene expression.
For example, histone changes will regulate other kind of, sorry, regulate gene expression.
gene expression dysregulation is associated with disease like cancer or Alzheimer's as well as spitting up the aging process.
The only thing is that right now there are only, the current methods only rely on the trial and error, but not optimization.
Due to the lack of optimization as well as utilizing the multi-omics data, there are a few questions that we thought about.
How can we optimize the epigenetic reprogramming automatically?
Can AI recommend the best interventions on gene expressions?
Can we personalize the therapy based on an AI model utilizing some historical data that can adapt to new multi-omics data?
We have an answer to the first two questions, but not the last one because we don't know how good our model could be right now.
To answer the first two questions you saw before, next one, we will have to face a fair number of challenges.
For example, the multi-omics data will of course have high dimensional, and the data could be sparse and have missing values, high computational cost, potentially lack of real world label data for validation.
Lastly, we need an AI model that can recommend actionable and interpretable insights.
Sorry.
Some solutions to each of the challenges that we came up with is that for high dimension, we can just probably use dimension reduction.
For sparse and missing data, we can impute the data.
For reducing the computational cost, we can try to select the real enforcement learning model or try implementing early stopping mechanism.
And then, about a lack of real world label data, we can try to extend the research by collaborating with wet lab researchers.
And lastly, our model is described in the last slide with those flow charts.
So basically, there's some pre-processing process before, but the process would start with some initial intervention and then try to apply it on the gene expression.
And we're going to validate that with the real world label data.
And I'm sorry.
And we're going to update the policy according to that reward function.
And we're going to reiterate the process again and again until we reach a better, the best accuracy we can.
Yep.
Sorry about that time.
Yeah.
Very much.
You discussed age reversing.
I would like you to please elaborate more on that and how your solution is contributing to the age reversing because it's a huge value proposition.
So what is the contribution to it?
Yep.
Yeah.
Thank you for your question.
So we have read a paper from Harvard that they indicated that there is some kind of gene expression modification that can reverse the phenotype or?
There was like an epigenome that I think gets affected.
If you change it, it affects directly the age.
And then if you, apparently if you can, there's certain, I didn't fully understand, there's certain like interventions you can do to kind of restore it back to its original state.
And in doing so you kind of reverse aging.
And how your contribution to that?
Oh, so our contribution is that we're going to try to build simulation environment that we can try to,
instead of making people doing it, we can try to do some in silico application, like creating an in silico lab that can simulate the whole process instead of using human power.
And this could be faster and more reliable.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Any other questions?
For this experiment in the Harvard, they did on the reds.
And so they did these experiments on the reds and they observed this like, it's kind of helping reds to like reduce the aging.
So it's possible is that the same?
It's, I don't know about the human, it's possible about humans or not, but they did some observation and it's kind of published, it's a, it's on like, it's a published work.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Sorry, we just learned all the biology stuff this morning.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
