And these are my group members, Josiah and Makai.
Our project is RNA-integrated sequencing analysis software, ICES.
So the premise of our project is essentially to optimize data analysis for RNA sequencing.
Now, just to give you some background, RNA sequencing is a technique used to analyze gene expression
of the entire transcriptome of a particular cell sample.
So this can be done for comparative analysis between different cell types or different conditions.
And the applications that RNA sequencing has in biomedical science has become prevalent in recent decades
because of the rise of genetics technologies.
Now, it's important to cell differentiation transcriptomic studies,
and it can be helpful to identify cancer biomarkers based on the transcriptome.
Additionally, it has been extensively used to research neurodegenerative disorders,
such as Huntington's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
And it is also critical to preclinical drug testing.
So the issue with RNA sequencing data analysis is first,
it takes a high level of technical skill for someone to be able to do data analysis for RNA sequencing.
Now, you can imagine why this would be a challenging issue in biomedical science,
as the people conducting the research are not familiar with systems such as R and Python.
Additionally, the procedure for doing the data analysis is quite fragmented.
It takes several different softwares, and it's very tedious and repetitive.
So the solution that we have come up with is called RNA integrated sequencing analysis software.
And this integrated software eliminates the need for multiple platforms as it all,
it does it all in one step.
It has a friendly user interface, and it allows easy conversion from the initial input to the final form of the data.
So it removes the technical barriers for individuals who are not experienced with computer science techniques,
which is incredibly helpful for biomedical research,
as it allows scientists to focus more on the intellectual aspects of their work that is part of their expertise.
So this is going to be the output that we receive.
So this is the initial screen that you see.
This is the front end.
So what happens here is you can upload the file of the raw data, essentially.
And this is the output that you get.
You get a detailed network and you see the connections between those genes.
So this is very helpful for biomedical research,
as you don't need much of a technical background in order to get this data.
And it allows useful insights that are driven by an AI model.
So, yeah, that's it.
This is our team.
I'm Donata.
And my contribution was the transcriptomics background and the planning and design.
This is Josiah.
His contribution was the back end development.
And he has experience with leveraging AI for biomedical applications.
Makai.
His contribution was front end development and data visualization.
So, yeah.
Thank you.
Do you have the demo with the final sort of visualization?
So the demo isn't really working at the current moment.
Can you speak up to the camera and the mic?
Sure, sure, sure, sure.
So, please.
Yeah.
So one part of the process isn't exactly working as intended.
However, this is, it is our intention to make this a long-term project,
to make it a full developed product that is efficient, easy to use,
has a friendly user interface, and provides detailed feedback as the output.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
So who would be the actual end user of this?
Okay.
So, RNA sequencing is very prevalent in both industry and academia.
And typically, so the vision for this was that biomedical researchers would use this,
even though like some, some of them might not have experience in coding.
And this would simplify the process of doing data analysis for RNA sequencing.
So the target user for this would be biomedical researchers.
Great work.
You mentioned product.
Is this something you're looking to commercialize or maybe open sources?
So we're looking to make it open source because the whole point of this was that
it would be accessible and it would be easy to get the final product.
And it's my belief and our group's belief that it's important to make things open source
so that it propels the research and that's kind of like part of the point of our project
was so that it would speed up the process from going from preclinical to clinical trials,
which would help the world and help with age-related diseases and others.
In terms of development, how long do you think it's going to take to get to at least the first demo version?
Okay, I think this would be a question to answer for Josiah and Makai.
So what do you guys think?
Most of the actual, so most of the actual algorithm has already been designed.
The problem is really just ironing out the bugs and maybe adding more features.
I don't think it could take an extremely long time, not more than a couple months on as well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
