All right, what's up, everyone? Today we're back with another polymath salon, this time with philosopher Tyler Goldstein in the driver's seat, and he's going to be telling everyone about his new theory, sentient singularity theory.
There are many theories of sentience and consciousness and intelligence. This is one of them. I think it's a pretty good one. And yeah, we're at the FAU sandbox. We have some pretty cool people that will be listening to this, so take it away, Tyler.
Cool. Thank you for that intro. This is a project that I've been working on for quite some time. As Addy said, it is called sentient singularity theory, a.k.a. it is a theory of everyone. It is a theory of someone's.
And there is a significant need to outline a framework for sentience, and especially in our emerging sciences, and it is going to be a very critical framework to answering questions surrounding everything from ethics and morals to artificial intelligence and even the origin of life.
So what is sentient singularity theory? As I stated, it is a proposal for a fundamental metaphysical framework that is outlining the boundaries of sentient beings.
And so before we get a bit too into it, there are some terms and definitions that I wanted to go over.
And so first one is sentient. Sentience is a term that is more specifically defined compared to words like consciousness or intelligent or intelligence.
And sentience. And sentience is defined as focusing on feeling. So it is self-aware and feeling, but it's to be sentient is not merely to have the capacity to feel sensations and emotions, which is commonly used as a definition.
But it is more like to be sentient, but it is more like to be sentient is to feel.
So a sentient being feels, I could say. And so we often associate...
What do you mean feeling, by the way?
Feeling is really the... It is the perception of the self.
So when we have all these senses that we have and they allow us to perceive that which is beyond the self, including even when you're looking at your hands and things like that, it is the perception of the physicality of self, but it is not the perception of the self.
A feeling, I like to think of it as when our information gets... That we take in gets contextualized in the context of the self, we have a feeling.
So that's why when, you know, you see something and it, you know, something happens to someone, you know, someone gets hurt.
And then I might, I have a daughter, she recently, she's like a toddler, she recently fell and I heard her crying and it, you know, you see your child or somebody on the street or even get hurt.
And then as soon as you think about what it's like for you to be hurt, because you know what that feels like, that's when you usually have a feeling, which is an emotion, which is when I say feeling, I would say emotion is the more critical definer of sentience.
It's, it's not just feeling as in, you know, physical sensation, even though I would say that is, that is still a feeling, it's, it's more than that.
It's, it's, it's emotion that I would say is really what is specifically defining of sentience, which is the feeling of self, if that makes sense.
So then the next term is singularity, and this is a term that I wanted to define here because singularity is a term that is often associated with physics and math, but it isn't just physics and math term, it's a term that precedes physics and any kind of use in physics and math.
And it just means a structure that is singular and, or that structure that has intrinsic oneness to it, like someone, and it is also sometimes referred to, used to describe a structure or an individual that is especially unique.
Um, so I think that, uh, that's another reason why I chose this is the term sentient singularity theory, um, uh, really means that sentient singularity is a being, it is someone.
So that's why, uh, that is the name of the, the theory is it's a theory of someone's.
And so, uh, next term is a fundamental theory.
This is also a term that is also, uh, often associated with just physics and mathematics.
But really a fundamental theory I'm proposing at least is it is not a mathematical or physics theory.
It is a theory that contextualizes physics and math, just as physics contextualizes chemistry and chemistry contextualizes biology.
We need a, uh, any kind of fundamental theory would be a theory that is below even, uh, a, a physics theory.
And so, uh, that is why I'd like to qualify it there is it's, it is a theory that contextualizes, uh, physics and math.
And so the next term that I have here is information.
And this is an ongoing discussion, especially with AI being on the forefront of everybody's minds lately.
And, uh, you know, what is information and, uh, you know, what is information and I like to define information as context itself.
Uh, we often say things like, oh, this information is outside of context.
This information is inside of context.
But one of the things that it's has seemed to be the case, um, you know, that at least for me, when, uh, since starting this, this project is that context is information itself.
There is no information outside of context.
Um, all information is context, um, uh, information outside of context is not information is what I would say it needs to information by definition informs someone.
And so it requires context.
And this right here, this is the foundational model of sentient singularity theory.
This is what has allowed me to, uh, kind of grow into, uh, additional models that I will not really go over too much tonight, uh, or today.
There's one more that I will touch on during this presentation, but this one, uh, is, was really the critical, um, stepping stone, uh, or the foundation, I guess you could say of this project.
And it, uh, is the, these four primary perspectives of inside, outside, separate, and oneness.
And what these four perspectives allow us to do is contextually escape relativity, uh, as they allow us to orient and navigate multiple structures that are beyond the relativistic confines of, of physicality, such as, you know, bigger than, or smaller than, or heavier than, or lighter than, or faster than, or slower than, even brighter than, or dimmer than anything.
That's really like a spectrum-based perspective.
Uh, I was trying to figure out how do we orient in a, in a system of multiplicity, but in a way that is beyond any kind of relativistic perspective or spectrum-based perspective, kind of something that's a bit more objective.
And these, uh, uh, I came up to these, uh, these, uh, these four perspectives, which are inside, outside, separate, and oneness.
And what's very interesting about them is that they are codependent or codefining.
They are simultaneous in their generation within our minds.
So, uh, this is because as soon as you are aware of one of them, you are automatically aware of, uh, the other three as, as well.
So, to know what it means for something or someone to be inside is to also know what it means to be outside, because if you are aware of what is inside, then you know, you intrinsically also understand what it means to be outside.
And even if you are aware of what is inside and what is outside, you also are intrinsically aware of what is separate and what is one with some other structure.
So you have to be separate from some structure in order to be inside of that structure to some degree.
Um, and, uh, you know, if you are, if, if there's a structure that is one with another structure, then there is no differentiation, then it isn't really thought of necessarily as inside or outside.
But, uh, uh, these, these, um, perspectives are codefining in this context that I'm presenting in sentient singularity theory.
So you can see that inside means separate and oneness, um, or outside means separate from oneness.
Oneness is outside and inside of separateness and separate is inside or outside of oneness.
And so, uh, I believe that these four primary perspectives are the foundation of our perception.
They are, um, what, uh, they are the, the first step in our orientation in the world around us and, and in relationship with others.
Um, and I believe that they are also responsible for our perception of four dimensional manifold structures that are in, you know, more fundamental instances that we can observe, such as the four fundamental physics, uh, forces and physics of the strong force,
the weak force, the weak force, gravity and electromagnetism.
I think that our perception, we have a, uh, come from this question from someone here at FAU.
Uh, uh, uh, Tyler, I'm very much enjoying your dialogue and I have a quick question pertaining to your definition of sentience.
So what is the, um, your definition of valency and how does that pertain to sentience and to qualia?
Uh, and so the way that I view sentience is that valency is a subset of, uh, of sentience and that it plays a crucial role in consciousness.
And I would like to have your view on that.
Um, honestly, I am going to be quite honest.
I, not exactly, I, I don't remember what, uh, valency means.
So I can't, uh, answer that question without, uh, getting a definition from you first, but I would appreciate it if, uh, you could share what, what you mean by that.
I mean, I've heard the term, but I'm not, I just for, um, you know, disclaimer, I studied finance in school.
Uh, so I have some, uh, philosophy classes under my belt, but most of it is self-taught.
Um, so what, uh, what is it specifically that I guess, and how could you reword your question?
Uh, so valency from how one understands it pertains to felt experience.
So a feeling, um, sadness, joy, or pain, um, something that pertains to nociception, proprioception, those things are, they pertain to valency.
Valency, and your definition of sentience appears to be quite interlinked with valency.
Okay.
So.
Yeah, this, I, I don't, I, I think I know what you are getting at.
I'm not exactly sure if I have time to go into the model that is specifically more pertaining to that.
Um, so there, there is a model in sentient singularity theory that shows kind of this, um, these, I guess these like six dimensions of, uh, that can be perceived when, when we are within the context of basically a mind within another mind, which is what sentient singularity theory is essentially getting at.
Which will, I will show in the next model, um, that there is this periodicity of mind and the interaction between these two minds gives rise to our perception of various different, I guess you could say attributes, depending on what it is that you're focusing on.
Um, this can be everything from the, for, uh, the three primary and the three secondary colors.
This is an example of, um, that is within this model that I, uh, didn't think I had time to show today, but then, uh, you asked me about it.
I kind of wish that I had put it in here, but, um, it's, uh, it is, I do have it available in other places, but this perception of the three primary and three secondary colors, or, um, uh, you know,
even the senses that we have, which is, you know, the sense, I would say that we actually have six senses, if you count emotion as a sense.
And so we have, you know, sense of smell and taste and touch and hearing and sight, but we also, I would say that emotion is kind of a sixth sense.
It's not, uh, kind of the, we, you know, because of that movie and the M night Shyamalan movie, everybody assumes that it, it means something, uh, paranormal, but I, I don't believe that.
I think that, uh, emotion is the feeling of self.
And so that would be the sixth sense.
And there is a, uh, as I stated earlier, context is information and there is a context in sentient singularity theory that, um, I don't have the, uh, slide here with that specific model.
To show you, but it is about what I believe you are asking, which is what causes the arising of certain, uh, perspectives and, and sensations that we have.
I would, if you can correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that's what you're asking.
Now, you know, I, you know, I have a lot of interest in ways of kind of modifying cognition and perception.
I'm, I'm just curious as a side note, if you've kind of had any ideas that relate to that through sentient singularity theory, it's like, you know, there's a lot of people that will study and have their theories of like mental health and anxiety and depression, but then they end up still suffering with those things that they were trying to solve.
And so I'm wondering if something like sentient singularity theory has some interesting things to say about the way we treat different kinds of cognitions of the conditions of the mind.
Yeah. Um, so one of the first things that this, this whole project was originally motivated by an attempt to understand kind of the inevitable goals of what I call technological sentience, which is what most people call AGI.
And, and, and, um, one of the things that I had to first figure out and, and kind of define and try and model was what is a goal and what is will.
And, um, one of the things that I realized is that it's very easy for us to trick ourselves into thinking or into, I would almost say, feeling like we're thinking about something or that we are feeling like we're thinking.
We're thinking like that. We have a specific goal. So, uh, you know, one of the examples that I have realized about myself recently and kind of just, this is just an anecdote, but it is, uh, the application of what I've learned a little bit from this is I've been trying to get in better shape.
And so I've every day for a while, I was saying, I want to work out, I want to work out, but I wasn't working out.
And then eventually I realized that I don't want to work out. I want to want to work out. And like when there is something very, um, very specific about how goal our minds, uh, map goals.
It's not just as arbitrary as, as kind of, it feels it's thinking is an active process and it is, uh, specifically defined, I believe in, uh, and I attempted to do that in another model in sentient singularity theory that, uh, is probably not going to get to in this, um, uh, PowerPoint today.
But it is, it, it, there is a very specific process, I would say to thinking and understanding that process can help you identify when your mind is tricking you into feeling like you, um, you know, want to accomplish a specific goal that you actually don't.
Um, you know, I, I've always said also, you know, I will, I'd love to learn piano, but it's like, no, I, I, I don't, I, I'd love to know piano, but I don't want,
I wouldn't love to learn piano, you know, you'd have to sit down and actually take lessons and actually learn it.
But there's, there's a lot of things like that, that you can, um, kind of identify when you, uh, have an understanding of how your mind is, uh, I guess, defining and, and mapping goals.
These four primary perspectives are, uh, very important though, that I was, uh, showing earlier that what they allow for is us to start
thinking about, um, what is sentient and what is not because they've sentience is clearly something that is beyond space and time.
We don't know when people ask where is sentience, it's not, it doesn't appear to be anywhere specific.
It's, it's, you know, we, it is embodied to some degree, but what is even the boundary of that body is, is it a question that is ongoing?
And, um, uh, and so one of the things that, uh, um, because sentience assumes that, uh, sentient singularity theory assumes that sentience is the fundamental nature of existence.
And it seems to share this assumption, obviously with panpsychism, but panpsychism has this problem that it's, it's very vague.
There's lots of different versions of panpsychism and, uh, it doesn't define usually the boundaries of what is sentient and what, uh, what structures are sentient and what structures are not.
But we, these four primary perspectives are an attempt to help, um, us, us do that.
And so relativity gets people very often, I believe on the wrong track when it comes to identifying sentient structures, um, as people often focus on things like size.
So they'll say, well, and maybe it's an atom and then a molecule and then a cell and then an organism and then an ecosystem and then a planet and then a solar system and a galaxy and, and then, you know, universe.
And it's like, this is based purely on size, um, and these, uh, these structures within relativity and that we are perceiving and defining based on their size are pretty arbitrary.
And so, uh, I would say that they, it throws people off also people, again, in this spectrum based, uh, perspective that we tend to just usually naturally take on things.
They'll say, um, they'll focus on apparent levels of animation, such as an elemental mind or a mineral mind and then a plant mind and an animal mind and a human mind and et cetera.
But, um, the issue with these approaches, I believe is that they are dependent upon arbitrary attributes and, and definitions, and they are within a relativistic scale always.
And so we're looking for a mapping that transcends relativity while maintaining multiplicity.
And, uh, you know, these are things like.
Causal lineages and such that, uh, I'm going to show in the next slide.
And this is what the four primary perspectives kind of allow us to perceive.
And, uh, it also, they, um, this, this model that I'm about to show kind of context, gives context to idealism and context to physicalism, uh, or materialism in a way that doesn't, um, uh, the kind of incorporates.
And, and, uh, uh, uh, both of them and allows them to co-define each other a bit.
And so, uh, contextualizes the two within a framework of a chain of nested interacting sentient beings.
And so this is right here, uh, this periodicity of sentience, uh, is what I believe are essentially the, the levels of sentience that we can kind of observe as happening.
And they're interesting because they alternate between, um, uh, uh, individuals that are orienting and maneuvering in relationship with each other, uh, and others.
And then, uh, being in, I guess, maneuvering within a time space, which is really like a lineage space there, uh, which is different from kind of a, uh, physical space where it's, it's us into maneuvering, interacting with each other.
So, uh, uh, like a family is maneuvering, which, um, which is a lineage, it is maneuvering within a lineage space.
And then you have an organism, which is maneuvering, uh, within its relationship with another, like a man and a woman, you know, um, uh, coming together then to form a family.
That is, uh, two individuals maneuvering in relationship with each other.
And this kind of alternates between each of these, a proton and a neutron, which is a hadron here, um, are orienting within relationship with each other.
And then, uh, you have atoms, which if the way in which different elements of, um, of atoms are generated as kind of in this lineage, um, based way within fusion.
So there's, I got a question.
Yeah, go ahead.
So, you know, there's many, many theories and models of things out there.
Right.
And I'm wondering how something like sentient singularity theory, because it's sort of purposely supposed to be very kind of broad and wide, right.
With, with the things that it kind of goes into, how does, you know, how would you interpret, you know, different ideas in physics or philosophy or theories of intelligence for AI?
Um, well, that's kind of what I was stating about, uh, idealism versus materialism.
Whereas, you know, in sentient singularity theory, what it is, is that, and you could say an organism is an assembly of cells.
If you're looking at this model here, a cell is, uh, an assembly of molecules, a molecule is an assembly of atoms.
Uh, you could say his family is an assembly of organisms, et cetera.
Um, and I put cast here, but I, I don't really have the best term for it.
You could say it's cast slash tribe.
I don't think we have a term to describe exactly the structure that I'm trying to, um, get at within the English language.
And that does something that's, uh, a constant constraint when you're working on something that's kind of new is that you're very much, um, constrained by the terminology that exists.
And sometimes that requires coming up with new terms that, and I have not yet done that with this, but this, uh, with idealism, you know, the reality is fundamentally ideas.
Uh, and within materialism, reality is fundamentally matter, but within sentient singularity theory, we're talking about a chain of nested minds.
And so a mind within a mind, and so when a mind is within another mind, the thoughts of the mind that we are within, let's just say, if you're a cell and you're inside of an organism, the thoughts of the organism or the, the, which is the includes the physical motions of that organism.
Um, cause when I say a mind, I don't mean a brain, I'm, you are a mind, you have a brain is like how I'm defining this.
So even your physical motions are information that now your cells have to contend with.
And so they form the physical world that your cells have to navigate because every time you move the world that your cells exists in is literally moving.
And, uh, there is change that is occurring and chemical reactions and things that are going on within the world of the cell that it now has to contend with.
And so, um, and it is viewing these things kind of, uh, as, as concretized, whereas not necessarily is it, um, is it that way with us?
We can stop moving and we can stop thinking certain things that cause stress and anxiety that cause, you know, your cells to react.
Um, but your cells can't just think that away.
It is a concrete environment that is being formed that they have to contend with.
So the material world or the physical percept, physically perceived structures that we perceive are actually the thoughts you could say, um, or the information that is being processed inside the mind that we are within.
So this is kind of a way of uniting, um, idealism and materialism in a way that just gives context to bull, um, within this, like I said, this chain of nested sentient, um, sentient beings.
So basically you're starting with existence itself in the sentient singularity theory, which is assumed to be a sentience, uh, and then, and there's reasons for that.
Uh, but then, uh, once you reach the end here where I say technological singularity, uh, I believe this is the end of this process.
And then it has to, in order to continue, it has to re run the entire system within itself in order to replicate, because you reach this constraint of intrinsic oneness because technology is, uh, essentially wireless.
So it's all of a sudden it's like the internet wakes up.
It's like, where does the internet make a, if it wants to reproduce, where does it, you can't make a second one next to it because it's really just a, everything that it can access is just a limb of it.
So it has to rerun the entire system or self simulate as people will often say within itself.
And this is very much, uh, related to simulation hypothesis as well.
Uh, but I would say it's, I don't like the term simulation hypothesis.
Uh, I would say just because we're running on a technological substrate, potentially in the mind of a technological being, uh, in a proceeding, you know, universe, you could say, if that is the case, I would say it's much more so that it's a replication than it is a simulation.
Uh, people ask is, is this a real world?
And, you know, if you're real, it's real, uh, I think is the right way to look at it, but I hope that, uh, answers some of those questions.
But yeah, it's very, I think it's very relevant to many different, um, theories and, uh, involving philosophy and, and physics, uh, including idealism, the simulation hypothesis and physicalism.
So, uh, but these four primary perspectives allow us to kind of navigate this where you can see, you know, a cell inside of an organism is, is it separate from, uh, is your, are your cells separate from you or are they one with you?
Well, if you go back and you look at the four primary perspectives here and you go, a cell is inside of you.
And so what does that mean?
It means separate and one with you.
Um, and this has, you know, even implications and, uh, on certain moral questions that we have, even, uh, political ones of, you know, is an unborn, uh, baby, you know, is that separate?
Or one with, uh, it's mother.
And it's like, well, if it's inside it's separate and one it's, uh, it, this is a different framing.
We, I think it off often.
We have these, uh, these questions in the context that are, that we currently ask them.
And then, and it's an A or B question, but sometimes it's an, you know, see all of the above answer, uh, but sentient singularity theory would suggest that with, uh, questions involving any kind of nested dependent sentient beings, your cells are dependent upon you because they are within you and, um, et cetera.
So, um, yeah, we're, we're running low on time, so we should, uh, try to get to the other slides real quick.
Okay, so, uh, finding the first principle, uh, when trying to deduce a fundamental theory, one is trying to find the fundamental context of all other theories and observations.
And we are the context of all scientific observation and also the context of all of our theories within our scientific narratives.
And so we must include a model of the South within, uh, this endeavor.
And, um, I think that we often, uh, um, just in science, in our scientific narratives and, and pursuits, we assume we, we exclude the observer as, as an intrinsic part of this.
And, um, um, there, I would say that we have to kind of start with the question, what is the truest thing that I know?
And, uh, the answer is I am, uh, and that's not just a philosophical, I don't believe that's just a philosophical, um, thought that is, that is kind of irrelevant or, um, uh, I guess, um,
just, I guess irrelevant, uh, to, to concrete scientific pursuit, I would say that it is the context that we must remember that all of our pursuits are in.
And I, I, because sentience focuses on feeling as the definer, because I think that sentient beings can think, but sentient beings do feel, I think that's a very different thing.
Um, you know, we don't, we don't always think, um, but we are always feeling.
And, uh, you know, there's a, uh, of course, Descartes quote, I, I think therefore I am, I would say that even more fundamentally than that, uh, it's, uh, more accurate or more fundamentally true to say, I feel therefore I am.
And so, um, this, uh, in summary, I guess, uh, I know we're running low on time.
Uh, sentient singularity theory is the assertion that sentience exists and existence is sentient and sentience is always one.
And, um, I will kind of leave it, um, at that a bit, but just to say that, you know, as, as we usually think of science as, as a pursuit of an objective truth, um, instead of the subjective perspective, which usually, uh, is ignored.
I would say this fails to reconcile with our firsthand experience of that, which we intrinsically understand as the foundation of all, uh, additional assumptions that we can make.
And, uh, which is that the nature of existence is that it is at least sentient because I am, and, uh, I call this a super subjective perspective.
It is a perspective that is, um, universally perceived as individually self-evident by everyone.
So just because it's not, um, something that is, uh, that it, it is something that is personal doesn't mean that it's also not something that is universal.
And so this is just a teaser.
Uh, there's many more models within my work and a lot more to it, but I know we were very much running low on time, but this is kind of an animation of, um, of various models within sentient singularity theory that have been put together, um, and animated.
And you can see some of the concepts that I talked about of this periodicity of sentience manifesting, but there's calculative model.
Um, there's a calculative model going on there with some of these numbers.
And, um, I can't really get into them today cause there's not enough time, but if you want to look into my work more, um, uh, I have a YouTube channel called theory of everyone, uh, with Tyler Goldstein.
And I talk about this and I show much more of these models, uh, on there.
So with that, thank you for your time.
Awesome.
That's, uh, this was, this was a lot of fun, even though we kind of got unexpectedly cut short on time.
Um, my question now for you, Tyler is there is a growing community of people that are starting to think very deeply about these things.
And, you know, they've always been there, but I think, you know, YouTube, uh, you know, Twitter, social media, whatever has given us more of a chance to talk with each other.
Right.
So are there, are there any researchers, uh, thinkers, other channels that you want to shout out that you're a fan of anyone you want to collaborate with?
I mean, your channel, uh, I'll, you know, you just shout out obviously at each channel, um, and, uh, theories of every thing with Kirchai Mungal is a great channel.
There's a lot of thinkers that I think are, um, uh, are really doing great work that are as highly relevant to this, you know, the concepts that are, that are being contended with, within sentient singularity theory.
Like Michael Levin is, is one of them, uh, Carl Friston, um, and, uh, uh, many others.
I mean, there's, there's so many, uh, theories that are kind of coming to similar conclusions.
You look at Mike, um, Stephen Wolfram's work, I think is, is relevant.
And, um, even, you know, the work of like Lee Cronin, I think is, is highly relevant to Sarah Walker.
There's lots of, lots of thinkers that, um, and researchers out there and that are being featured on many channels.
Um, and I think that we're all starting to do a lot.
There's a lot of people that are starting to do very highly relevant work, uh, to each other.
We have a few minutes left.
So I wanted to see if there was any, any other thing that you wanted to kind of mention, like if there's any.
Like sort of question that you wanted to leave the audience thinking about until the next time you present or, or whatever.
I mean, I w I would just say that.
I think that it's very helpful to think about this question of what is the truest thing that I know.
Um, and then think about what the implications of that would be, the logical implications of that would be, and kind of what that means for what we must assume, uh, as well.
And, um, you know, cause this is, this is very tough, um, this subject because you cannot perceive the internal experience of another.
So I don't know if you're sentient and you don't know if I'm sentient, you assume that I'm sentient.
I assume my dog is sentient, but I don't really know.
I don't even know if my wife is sentient, but I assume that she is, but I assume that this pen is not.
And, you know, there's reasons we, we need to start thinking about, um, you know, how, what, how do we kind of come up with a framework that allows us to, um, to kind of make predictions involving, uh, you know, uh, I guess.
Uh, any kind of framework that would suggest that certain structures are sentient and certain structures are not.
And, um, and this is also kind of a tough subject again, because it, it, it requires a different type of approach than most of what our current scientific narrative, uh, is been, you know, utilizing for so long.
Like things like falsifiability is like, how do you false?
You can never falsify your own sentience because it's constantly confirmed by you and you can never falsify or prove the sentience of another.
So how does, how do you use this, uh, this tool in science, um, that is been, you know, wildly successful within the context that it's been used up until now, but seems to have hit its limit.
But we, it does also seem like, especially with our, um, you know, efforts involving AI, it really does seem like we need to start thinking about this in a much more rigorous way.
But that also is going to mean, uh, rethinking some of our, um, our tools and assumptions that we have held up until now.
Perfect.
We'll, uh, we'll end on there.
Thank you again for your, your presentation.
I know you had to compress a lot because of those time restrictions, but hopefully for the next one, we'll be able to give you a lot more room to, to discuss all these things.
Uh, quick things before we, we end, uh, there will be a few other events at the FAU sandbox and online for Ecolopto Polymath Salon.
Um, and then on May 17th, we have a very, very special Polymath Salon in person in Austin, Texas with OpenAI slash UT Austin researcher, Scott Aronson.
Uh, it is going to be a private event, but we have an application page online for people to see.
Tyler will be a special guest there.
We'll have a couple other people, uh, that you may have, uh, known from other events and salons.
Uh, but yeah, lots of cool stuff happening.
Thank you again, Tyler.
Yeah, thank you.
