Hello everyone, sorry to keep you waiting. My name is Charmé and our team aims to elucidate
a relatively obscure structure within the body which is the microbiome with machine learning
software. Our goal is to create a tool researchers can use to map and predict the growth of and
behavior of microorganisms within the human microbiome. We hope that with the software's
ability to synthesize physiological interactions scientists can discover new patterns that will
advance our understanding of the important role the microbiome plays in health disease and ultimately
longevity. Okay the microbiome can be understood as the ignored middle child to the more popular
microbiome. It makes up less than 0.01 percent of the microbe population which is probably why it's
been overlooked for so long. Nevertheless it plays a key role in health disease and aging. Our immune
system is constantly responding to existent fungi within the body. It is hypothesized that fungi train
our immune system to discriminate between benign microbes and the harmful ones and in this healthy
example this is basically showing a specified immune response to a particular strain of fungus while
maintaining the population of the benign. And in here this is an overgeneralized antifungal cytotoxic
response which leads to tissue damage and in this example it's depicting dermatitis. All right our microbes
exist in a delicate balance and when it's disrupted they're associated with a plethora of diseases and
illnesses including cancer. This graphic over here just lists the associated fungi when it's overgrown it's
kind of just related to these diseases. Our understanding of the microbiome is very limited because this is an
emerging field. The term microbiome was coined as recently as 2013 so there is still so much to
learn and we hope that our predictive model can help us understand this further.
So what our model does is it analyzes population distribution growth patterns and response to specific
of specific fungi to their environment in a real-time simulation. And we're going to show you the demo now.
Oh we can mute. Oh yeah here it's showing the population of certain strains of fungi.
And right here are sliders that change the parameters and the color as well as the text here indicates the
state of the population of said fungus.
And to further elaborate how this works it integrates microbiome sequencing
data and deep learning to predict and model healthy and unhealthy states.
There is so much potential in bridging biology and technology to understand this long overlooked
mechanism. Through investigating the microbiome we can revolutionize how we address health challenges
and improve the lives of people in the here and now. Thank you.
Oh yes and there is so much speculation still. I'm so sorry. There is so much speculation to be had
with this field and a lot of questions that we don't have answers to.
I also want to extend my thanks to all the organizers, mentors and judges,
as well as Manuel Capiendo who developed
our demo. Arwen and Asil and myself who worked on the research paper in addition to the demo.
And this presentation. So the floor is now open for questions.
So I saw the demo and give us an idea of what are we seeing here. What do the colors represent?
Please excuse me if uh if you said that. I didn't I didn't hear that part.
Of course. Yes sir.
Yeah so if anyone didn't hear the question was about what the culture presented and as well the
actual demo. So since this is a very emerging field a lot of data is required and we don't know
a lot about it. So going through our research paper this was supposed to visualize basically how
the hundreds maybe even thousands of different um fungi could. So we want to understand how that
works and possibly go for a way to simulate the behaviors that works in the human body.
And you try to measure this against the tools that already exist for the microbiome because you
you can already map the whole microbiome and there is a possibility to uh to draw a parallel between
the two techniques there. Have you ever thought about that?
If anyone didn't hear he was asking about how we kind of compared it to
uh the microbiome and how they uh analyze this that we were saying sir?
Um so yeah there was a few research that where they developed a a sorry they did develop a
analysis for modeling it. Um there was very little for uh the microbiome because it's just so unknown.
So being able to gather as much data as possible with the research is just a great way
to um be able to utilize that as well and find out more about this uh emerging field.
Well thank you.
