Hello everyone, we're Octadec. My name is Vaughn. This is Kyla. This is Farras. And then this is Max.
And we're looking into stearic acid. And stearic acid commonly has been used in cosmetics, in lotions for softening the skin.
But what we want to do is look into stearic acid as a potential treatment for type 2 diabetes.
So stearic acid is a non-toxic saturated fatty acid that is found in lots of common foods like beef, pork, fish, chicken, butter, milk, coconut oil, and palm kernel oil.
Also, while consuming these lean meats that are rich in stearic acid like beef and chicken, it could reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Stearic acid also has a neutral effect, which means that it does not increase the bad cholesterol LDL levels.
This can also be extracted from common oils through full hydrogenation.
The problem for our group is type 2 diabetes. Diabetes mellitus is a condition where cells cannot effectively use insulin to absorb glucose from the blood.
Type 2 diabetes occurs as a result of insulin resistance and visceral fat.
If not treated properly, type 2 diabetes could increase the risk towards cardiovascular disease, stroke, blood vessel damage, nerve and kidney damage, eye and foot damage, as well as Alzheimer's disease and dementia.
So our solution to combat type 2 diabetes is using stearic acid.
So, as said before, the main problem of type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance, which leads to hyperinsulinemia, which is an increase in insulin secretion and beta cell compensation.
Increasing stearic acid causes the acid to take the role of a negative regulator of insulin recognition by inhibiting a protein called tyrosine phosphatase 1b.
Revealing this beta cell to stearic acid causes apoptosis and dysfunction in the cell.
The RNAs of this beta cell react to stearic acid treatment, which ultimately uncovers regulatory functions.
Stearic acid has also been used to protect cortical neurons against oxidative stress.
This acid does this by increasing internal antioxidant enzymes, thus having a neuroprotective effect.
So there's a case study done in 2014 where researchers worked with mice with breast cancer.
And what they did was they organized them into three groups.
One group was treated with stearic acid.
Another was treated with oleic acid.
And then the third group was treated with linoleic acid.
And what they found was that there was a 70% reduction in visceral fat in the mice that were treated with the stearic acid.
And this was really interesting because this reduction in visceral fat, and this shows the effectiveness that it has against type 2 diabetes.
And breast cancer as well because visceral fat was also found to be correlated with metastasis, which is the spread of cancer cells.
And so another study from 2021 confirmed that stearic acid can also be used in general against cancer.
And then even though like saturated fatty acids are harmful, stearic acid, even though it is a saturated fatty acid, it kind of goes against what's commonly known about saturated fatty acids and that it is able to be more beneficial than harmful.
And then so for our team, I want to give special thanks to, first of all, for Ross, who is our team leader and content organizer for the scientific articles.
I also want to give special thanks to Kyla, who is our executive note taker.
To Max, who is our chief editor and initiator for our stearic acid concept.
Myself, I did research the 2014 and 2021 case studies for stearic acid.
And then one of our members who unfortunately was not able to be here with us, Katrina, she helped research the stearic acid in foods.
And I want to give a very special thanks to one of the mentors, which is Michael Ostroff over there.
Thank you so much, Michael, for guiding us throughout the entire process.
Your help was very much appreciated.
So we thank you very much.
And with that, that's the end of our presentation.
Thank you all for listening.
Thank you.
So, is this solution revolutionating the state of the art in the research for diabetes or the products that are outside in the market already?
I'm sorry, could you please repeat that?
Sure.
Is it revolutionizing the work against not-to-diabetes?
Currently, there aren't any drug trials that are in place for using stearic acid against to help reduce the symptoms of type 2 diabetes.
We could potentially help to increase the effect of that by moving forward by using stearic acid in further drug trials
to see if it has a potential revolutionary impact against type 2 diabetes.
Thanks.
Thank you.
All right.
Good.
Good.
