How many of you guys are stressed out from the hackathon?
We have the solution for you.
We are the bioilluminators and we're proposing a new application called NeuroCort,
which is an application to help you manage and monitor your stress.
To promote a longer and healthier life, we're focusing on lowering the amount of chronic stress exerted on the body,
which directly accelerates aging.
We propose a non-invasive device that can monitor cortisol levels which increase under stress.
We pair this cortisol monitoring device with an app that alerts the user when cortisol levels are higher than normal
and gives helpful tips on how to lower it.
So briefly, what is cortisol?
Cortisol is a steroid hormone released by the adrenal gland during any stressful situations like this presentation.
And basically, it prepares the organism for the structural activity,
which biochemically translates to increasing metabolic processes to give you enough energy to do what you need to do.
And why is this important?
Because sometimes when you leave this mechanism turned on for a long period of time,
it can actually have a negative effect like damaging cellular machinery.
So as we age, our bodies naturally experience more stress,
more stress due to physical, emotional, and environmental factors.
Chronic stress hampers our body's ability to resolve inflammation effectively.
Over time, prolonged stress leads to consistently high cortisol levels,
which can accelerate aging, increase the risk of chronic disease.
High cortisol levels contribute to heart disease, weakened immune function, metabolic disorders,
and has been linked to neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.
By tracking cortisol with NeuroCort, we can manage stress more effectively,
improve overall health, and potentially extend lifespan.
So one of the challenges with monitoring cortisol is that right now,
the Oling systems that are out there only provide you a number instead of being able to process the data
and give you a trend of your cortisol levels.
Another issue is they also exclude important factors such as weight, your age, and your height.
And the single-point measurements like a mouth swab or a blood test,
they take a long time to get the data, and by the time you get it,
your cortisol levels are already either higher or lower.
And it's important when you take it, like what part of the day,
because in the morning your cortisol levels are high,
it's actually the reason why you wake up in the morning,
and then at night it has to go down so you can go back to sleep.
So you always have like a varying level of cortisol inside your body.
On the other hand, the device that we are proposing is going to be continuously monitoring the cortisol level,
and it's going to be in real time, and it's going to give an instantaneous feedback as an indicator of stress levels.
So it's going to tell you that your levels are high, and it's also going to suggest what to do.
For example, it's going to suggest an action like relaxation techniques,
so for example like meditation or walking or some exercise, and hydration and diet adjustments.
In the future, we'd like to implement vagus nerve stimulation,
which is basically a mild electrical pulse that's going to stimulate the parasynthetic nerve system,
and it's going to lower your cortisol levels, hence lower your stress levels.
And we are also trying to incorporate secondary indicators for, for example, adrenaline and pulse measurements,
so we can get more accurate results, and we are trying to incorporate AI analysis
to give a more personalized treatment for everyone.
So the user interface is going to display the cortisol level.
So for example, in this case, it's 16.5, which is considered to be high,
and the app is going to tell you to try taking, for example, five deep breaths to bring it down.
You can also, you also have access to the history of your cortisol levels,
which are time-stamped, so you can access and see when and how your levels were during the day,
and it's also going to plot it throughout the week.
We are the Bioleters!
You showed what looks like a glucose continuous monitor.
Do you think that there is existing technology like that that you can bootstrap to bring this to market faster?
Yes, actually, so UCLA produced a paper where they had already had the monitoring device,
which we were trying to incorporate the app to, connected,
and then, because, as he mentioned, the existing technologies do not process the data.
So they only give a numerical value, but doesn't advise the user on what to do with this level.
So that's what we're trying to incorporate, to give the users the opportunity to choose and live a healthier and longer life.
Very nice.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you.
You did have a question over there.
Oh, sure.
You guys have a question?
You have a question?
I was just curious.
Do you think you can, like, incorporate that into, like, a Fitbit or, like, an Apple Watch or something?
Yeah.
We consider this.
We consider this option.
For now, we only have the patch.
Oh, just the patch?
So, for now, we are not sure how to incorporate it into a Fitbit or, like, any existing one,
but I'm sure the technology can.
I'm so sorry.
As long as it has contact with the skin and when it's touching it, it's possible.
It's just, you would have to, it's a lot more innovation.
Okay.
That'd be a good selling point, in a way.
Yes.
Yes.
So good.
You already got a bite.
Don't forget...
