Hi, my name is Andy. I'm an independent researcher in Cambridge. I'm here to present our work, Three Sigma.
So, I didn't know you were going to be here, or else I would have taken that off, but I track a lot of things by myself, but not nearly as many as you.
I'm also a top 1% Tetris player globally. That becomes relevant in a second.
I used to be a kid, and I was on Facebook, and I found this great game, it's called Tetris Friends.
It's sort of like normal Tetris, but you fight each other, so whenever you clear lines, it gets sent to the other person, and you're trying to destroy them.
At the time I was playing this, there were a lot of people that I considered bots, because they were really good at this.
It wasn't until I got older and got better reflexes and stuff that I also got really good at this.
For instance, here's my improvement graph. This was the journey to getting to 1%, and this represents 10,000 games of Tetris that I've played.
Probably at 20th by now, because the last day I've come in here for like a year and a half ago.
So, the really cool thing about this is that I got good at this in college, and they give you a bunch of stats, right?
Like how fast you complete it, how efficient you are when you play, all this stuff.
And at the same time I was playing Tetris, I was also doing homework and stuff, I was in college.
So this is a common graphic, right? And I think most people just fuck the sleep.
And my mom was like, you know, you should sleep more.
Obviously, she's going to say that because she doesn't have fun with friends or get good grades.
She's suffering, whatever.
But, you know, I was like, nobody ever questions that, right?
Your mom tells you stuff, you're just like, I guess so, right?
But I actually had my sleep data from my Fitbit, and I had all the Tetris data from the website, right?
So I got on my computer, I put all some notebooks, and then I was like, boom, big correlation.
Absolutely nothing.
I was like, this is like super no correlation.
It was really disappointing.
But actually, this was great because it meant I could be like, hey mom, obviously, if I'm going to be a pro Tetris player, it doesn't matter how much I sleep.
You perform the same in Tetris, pretty good.
About two years later, I got an Apple Watch.
You know, time passed.
I slept several nights during this time.
And I was like, okay, let's do this again.
So this time, I was like, no more random association.
I want to see some real numbers.
So one thing I looked at is how does my Tetris performance change as I sleep differently?
Like when I wake up, how does it change throughout the day?
And so actually, this reflects like sort of your energy cycle throughout the day, right?
So over here is like when I just woke up, I'm kind of groggy for a couple hours.
You see that?
And towards the end of the day, you see there's a drop off.
And then somewhere in the middle, there's like, you know, a decrease in energy.
I'm sure we've all experienced like post-lunch coma.
But what I really was curious about was, is my sleep, does my sleep affect this curve?
And so I split it by a rolling average of how much I slept in the past week.
I found something pretty sad.
Turns out you do need to sleep more to do well in Tetris.
So over here, the orange line is, sorry, the y-axis here is how fast I'm playing.
This is a piece per second.
So it's, you know, pretty much how fast you're going.
And this is like a good measure to form it.
And so the higher is better on here.
And you see the orange line, obviously, you do much better if you sleep more.
You know, everyone kind of knows that.
But what I really learned about this was that like, you know, to prove your mom wrong, you need data.
And not only do you need data, you kind of need a lot of data.
Like almost no one else I know plays Tetris.
So no one has like a cognitive proxy with which to repeat their mother, right?
But I collect like all this data.
Like I have my location.
I used to take my grip strength.
I track when I take medication.
I have my air quality.
I have Spotify.
And even if you're not going to analyze this data, like it's nice to collect it.
Because at some point, you're going to have like God AI and they're going to go on and look at your data.
Be like, you should eat more potatoes if you want to get stronger or something.
Oh, yeah.
So Tetris versus sleep requires like a bit of analysis.
Like this took me maybe like three or four hours of coding just because like the data is in a weird format.
You got to like call it correctly.
You got to make sure the numbers aren't like fake.
If you do everything, like it's going to take a ton of analysis.
And so I just didn't want to do that anymore.
So my project for this hackathon is called Three Sigma.
Basically, it's a black box.
You take all your data.
You shove it in this thing and it automatically puts out all the analyses for this thing.
So we haven't written like the entire suite of statistical tests.
Obviously, there's like all sorts of things you could do.
I'm just doing simple correlation and correlation condition on something.
These are the two things that I'm doing.
And to avoid inundating you because you have like n cross n data points, right?
We're only taking the statistically significant ones and then showing you like,
oh, maybe this will be interesting for you.
So the way this works is you can take all your data from these services.
Fantastic. You download them.
You know, thanks to Europe, you can like access your data and it's easy to download.
One nice thing they've done.
But the issue is that they're all like different formats.
Like my Tetris, I scrape manually so it's in a text file.
Apple Health gives it in JSON.
Spotify gives it in JSON.
All this stuff is different.
The headers are different.
So the first thing you do is standardize all the file formats.
They're all CSVs now.
Now, when you look at them, the machine has no clue what these are.
For instance, like the type here is always data.
So they don't actually, we don't actually care about that one, right?
So what I have is for each of your data sources, you label the column with like an X.
That's a thing that you can change.
Or you label it with a Y.
This is a thing that is a result of your environment changing.
And then you take your magical black box and you shove all your data into it.
So I've only done a bit of my data because I didn't.
There's some parsing format like problems with the other data, which I didn't get to handle.
We just tested on a small amount of my data.
So the first, like some of the interesting outcomes, for instance, is glucose versus heart rate.
So when you eat like your body has to work to digest it, right?
So this correlates and the p-value is pretty good on here.
Another interesting thing was I found that like my Ritalin blood concentration correlated with my Tetris performance,
which is good evidence that it does something.
The blood concentration here is taken from my dosing time.
And then like there's an exponential up and exponential down depending on the drug half-life, which you can use to calculate that.
And so these are some interesting outcomes.
So the point of this is not that like I can analyze my data, right?
Like the outcomes of this like to me are just really cool.
But what we're really optimizing for are like things like people with debilitating allergies that they don't know about.
Like I saw on Twitter recently some guy was like, oh, I discovered I was allergic to potatoes, but only a little bit.
So whenever he ate potatoes the next day, it would be like awful.
And he'd be like, what is happening?
And then over time, he would track himself on this stuff and then he would find this allergy form.
And other stuff is like, you know, these people recommend you all sorts of supplements and things like magnesium or B12.
Like nobody checks and then they take 50 of them.
And like, it's just like the worst science I've ever seen.
And it really reminds me of like back in the day, they're just like this stuff really, really works.
This guy's like a real doctor and he'd sell you some like made up stuff.
And I want to know what actually works, like what actually works.
So by making this analysis really easy, I want to make it possible for us to actually grab a lot of people's data about what kind of supplements they're taking.
And then try to isolate the effects of each of those.
And the last thing is like, you know, health is actually not super solved.
For instance, here's my mom.
She had some heart palpitation problems.
She went to the doctor and they're like, oh, okay, we'll take an EKG.
Took an EKG, looked normal.
And the doctor was like, yeah, looks normal.
But she still has heart palpitations, right?
Like what is causing this?
Is it the sodium?
Is it the way you sleep?
Is it the things you do as exercise?
Like we actually do not have this data.
And even in clinical trials, you cannot access this data at such a granular level that you really want to.
For instance, like here's the best like wearable EKG.
It's like a sticker.
It lasts I think a day or two.
And it gives you like nice data, like every minute or something.
But you know, you have to charge it.
You have to replace it.
It's sticky.
Like it's in the way.
So one way I think that we can go towards a better, like a better way of measuring this data.
So we can have some reproducible interventions is implantable devices.
So I've been working on medical implants for a while now.
This is one of the projects I worked on was transferring power through the body.
And another one is like, I want to hack a CGM to power it using solar.
Like power is like the main problem for implantable devices because you need to put the device in a place which is big enough to accommodate a battery.
But if you can give power to the device or the device can harvest its own energy, then you don't have to worry about that.
Now your problems are chemical and biological.
But I don't know anything about those.
I'm just an electrical engineer.
So I'm working on really long term energy harvesting sensing implants in order to collect this data.
And so what I want to do with this is I want to prevent bad surprises and enable more good ones.
And that's the goal of this analysis.
John has questions.
John has questions?
That was great.
No questions.
It was great.
How feasible is it to make a solar power CGM?
And could you use any other, like even biological power source?
So there's like glucose based solar sources, like glucose based power sources which draw from blood sugar.
They're not as good.
Solar is definitely sufficient on like a one centimeter by one centimeter to power CGM.
The question is more like does the glucose oxidase break down?
But definitely like electrically we can do it.
Just no one has.
Cool.
Why not focus on urine and poop?
So non-invasive, don't have to worry about.
So, you know, I'm self-financed.
So I don't have like a ton of like free income to do like stuff regularly.
I would love to actually do it.
But mainly it's a question of money.
But yeah, definitely, definitely interesting.
I mean ideally if Theranos wasn't like fake we could have this every day.
But you know, unfortunate.
All right.
That's it.
Can I hold your questions?
Good.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
