So I'll start with my story from a young age.
So at around the age of 12, my aunt passed away.
And actually, she passed away from cancer.
But instead of being sad about her, I started to realize that I won't live forever.
And I was really sad for myself.
And I decided that maybe the right thing that I should do is try to understand why do we die?
How can we stop the clock? How can we increase the lifespan and healthspan?
I assume that we can discuss what is the difference in this definition later.
And that's actually drove me to study biology.
You can hear from my accent that I'm not a Native American.
I was born and raised in Israel.
Did my undergrad at Tel Aviv University.
I taught a PhD at the Weizmann Institute.
And then came here to Boston in 2002 and did my postdoctoral fellowship here at MIT, actually,
at the lab of Lenny Garante.
If anyone know him, he's one of the leaders of aging research.
A fun story is about my PhD study.
I came to the Weizmann Institute, which is the best institute at Israel, let's say, similar to MIT.
And there wasn't any lab that studied aging at that time.
So my strategy was, let's go to the best lab at the Weizmann in biology
and try to convince the professor to study aging.
And it wasn't easy, but he basically sent me to the library.
And after two weeks, at that time, by the way, there wasn't internet.
So I had to, I don't know if some people are old enough, you had to push, like, a disc of every year of PubMed
and try to search.
And I found that there was a gene or protein was cloned at that time.
And it's called Weizmann syndrome.
I don't know if you heard about it.
It's premature aging syndrome.
But it's an interest in the protein because it's helicase and exonuclease.
Anyway, I worked through that for a few years at the Weizmann.
And then I decided to come to MIT.
At that time, it was the best lab that had studied aging, the lab of Lenniger-Wenten.
They studied the CO2 family of the acetylase.
I'm sure that most of you know David Sinclair.
So David Sinclair was a postdoc at the same lab.
And I studied aging for, I studied at MIT for five years.
It was a lot of fun, actually.
I really enjoyed it.
But I also enjoyed this area.
I assume that all of you know this area.
It's called Candle Square.
And if you look at the mile around Candle Square, there are maybe thousands of companies
of biotech, high tech, pharmaceutical, and so on.
And also you have MIT in the mix as well.
And at that time, Lenny, the professor, started his own company.
David, which became a friend, started his own company.
I'm sure that they-
David who?
David Sinclair.
Who, by the way, might be coming physically tomorrow or at least talking remotely.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So and I needed a reagent as a postdoc at MIT.
So I looked at the Merck catalog and suddenly they withdrew the compound from the catalog.
So I asked the lady at Merck, where is this reagent?
And she said, oh, it's a small startup, a spin out of BU.
So I called them and started to work with them.
So what I'm saying, I started to be exposed to a lot of companies.
By the way, I also got my grant or my fellowship from Estelaude, a cosmetic company because I
studied the skin aging.
And basically that was the trip that my wife likes the most because every time that I came
back from the airport, I came with a bag with a lot of products, so she encouraged me to
travel and learn more.
And so during that time, I started to realize that maybe I can contribute more to humanity
if I start my own company than being a professor in academia that maybe will publish one or
two paper a year that maybe 10 other scientists will read.
And I knew that I want to do something related to aging, but I haven't had a clue exactly what.
So I moved to the industry, I worked in a, at that time it was called a computational biology,
a system biology company, small company here in Cambridge, the name was GELSTRUCT.
And that's basically if you ask students AI, but at that time nobody knew what is AI.
And what they developed, they developed a process that allow you to push a lot of data, let's
say for microarray or proteomics, and basically build a network analysis.
So based on the changing of expression, we can then predict what is the transcription factor
that they change, going up or down and so on.
And so I worked there and actually at that time, David Sinclair company used this company, so we did some work on CIL2,
but also I decided to use this platform to try to understand what happened with caloric restriction.
So I collected all the data, publicly available data that you can collect from there, pass it via this platform,
and basically build a network analysis, try to understand, okay, what's happening under the roof?
Because at that time, and I believe that still even today, we don't really understand what happened with caloric restriction.
So I identified the, I don't know, 18 to 20 different pathway, the syltonin pathway, the insulin pathway,
and other, the changing with caloric restriction, if you compare caloric restriction mice versus normal mice,
but also used some controls.
So one was resveratrol, what David Sinclair found, and I tried to see what is the effect of resveratrol,
and how similar resveratrol are that, and also young versus old mice.
And what I found that either resveratrol or young versus old mice,
or we covered like 20% of what caloric restriction is doing.
So basically, caloric restriction is not, let's say resveratrol is not a complete mimetic of caloric restriction.
And then I was posed a bit and thought about that,
and I realized that if at that time resveratrol was the best caloric restriction mimetic,
so then you will need maybe 20 of those, or maybe more,
in order to mimic the caloric restriction completely.
And then I said, why should we use small molecules or a drug?
Why can't we use food as a drug of choice?
So that was basically the whole movement of instant fragment.
Let's try to bring the drug cabinet from the bathroom to the refrigerator.
Let's use food as a drug of choice.
And then the question was, okay, how would we know what person X or person Y should eat?
And I started to look around.
I mean, me and my co-founder,
and we realized that the best marker to understand what's happening inside your body is the blood.
Because if you think about it, blood is a liquid blood.
Every physician or clinician uses it.
70% of the medical decisions are done based on blood,
but none of their wellness decisions are done by that.
So I started to look at the Quest Diagnostic.
Quest Diagnostic is the biggest diagnostic company in the U.S. at least.
They had 4,000 blood biomarkers.
So I said, we cannot test all of them.
It would be very expensive,
and maybe we won't have enough blood in our vein to test all of them.
Maybe with Theranos we could, but it sounds like it's not happening.
So I spent a few years basically looking at biomarker by biomarker
and trying to find which are the biomarker that we want to test.
So it was a pretty detailed and a long process.
And I came with a few criteria.
Again, it's not an AI.
It was my brain and a few other people.
But basically, let's look at biomarker of health and other disease.
So I didn't want to focus on biomarker that's related to cancer, for example.
But let's look at biomarker that are more showing you how is your metabolism,
how is your health, how is your stress.
Then let's look at biomarker that at least 1% of the population is out of normal
because they don't want to waste the money of the customer.
So that was important for me.
Let's really use a biomarker that at least 1% of the population have an issue with.
And the last one is a biomarker that you can modulate with mainly food,
but also supplement, exercise, and lifestyle changes.
So, for example, the thyroid marker, you cannot do it.
You need basically to inject or give them iodine pills.
But, for example, for glucose, you have a lot of things that you can do.
You can exercise.
You can eat more fiber.
And there are a similar mark of other things that you can do
in order to modulate it without water.
So that was basically the whole argument.
And then we started to spend time.
I hired some developers.
We developed the platform.
We developed the algorithm.
We developed, at that time, it was no expert system.
Today it's no AI.
And basically hired some biologists that build the knowledge.
So we extracted a lot of data from a peer-reviewed scientific publication.
And then I started to get into the consumer.
And the method was that, let's say, I start, instead of,
I really wanted to go to diabetic and cardiovascular disease patient.
But a few of my smart advisors told me,
listen, it's very hard to convince them,
but also they are not motivated.
And they don't have a lot of money in their pocket.
So I got a good advice.
Let's go for the athletic active population or professional athletes.
And we started with them.
We spent some time with triathletes, mountain runners, cyclists,
and a lot of professional athletes.
We have now thousands of professional athletes that are teams
and athletes that are using the platform.
And what was nice about that,
that they were willing to pay a lot of money.
So I always say that the best investor is your customer.
And I really follow that.
So when I started, even when I did the first pilot of 50 people,
everyone paid at least $250.
Because they said, if you don't pay first,
you take it less seriously.
And second, I need the money.
Because raising money is not easy.
Especially for someone that are doing it first time.
And I assume that most of you are first-time entrepreneurs.
If you are an entrepreneur that did it before
and they had a good exit,
all the investors that invest in you in the first time
will invest in you again.
So we started with that.
And also, I listened a lot to the customers.
I interviewed them.
I started.
So today we have 50 biomarkers.
But at that time, we started with around 10.
And then I went to those trackers and said,
oh, we really want to have a testosterone.
Okay, we have a testosterone.
And so on and so forth.
Then cortisol and so on.
So you are learning from them what they want.
And hopefully, you are interviewing enough people.
Because if one person wants testosterone and the rest don't want it,
it's not good.
But if you ask 10 people and 8 saying that they want testosterone,
it's very likely that it's a good representation.
It's better to ask one another.
But it's a matter of budget and time.
So we added more and more bloodbarkers.
And built the platform right there.
By the way, when we started, it was before the iPhone.
So, oh, actually, the iPhone came in 2008.
But it wasn't as abundant as today.
So we started with a website.
And then, I don't know, 10 years ago, we built a mobile app.
And we started, we added more and more modality of input.
So we started with blood.
I would say, like, I don't know, 7, 8 years ago,
we added the data from DNA.
So microarray and with imputation,
we get to around 60 million SNPs.
And with that, what we can do is a polygenic score.
If anyone knows what is that?
Basically, you look at a lot of SNPs.
And based on that, you can know the risk.
Do I have a risk for high cholesterol?
Do I have a risk for low grip strength?
Do I have a risk for dementia?
And so on, so forth.
And around 5 years ago, we added the data for fitness tracker.
So Apple Watch, O-A-Ring, Gourney, Fitbit, and so on.
And there you have a lot of data that can come in a...
The cadence is much faster.
So it can be even every 50 millisecond you receive data,
while it was blood every 3 months if you are very dedicated,
once a year if you are a normal person.
And DNA is once in a lifetime.
And a couple of months ago, we added another modality,
and that's basically the food that you consume.
So we use a platform to allow you to scan your food for a week.
And food and supplements, so then we know exactly what you eat.
And based on that, we can tell you what matter on micronutrient you consume,
what matter to eat there.
What is the intersection between your nutrition and sleep,
your nutrition and exercise, and so on.
And we also built a small app inside the app.
For example, because we have the data from the fitness tracker,
we have something called check-in.
So every time, let's say, we told you to eat avocado,
so you need to check in for avocado.
But if you told you to sleep 7 hours,
we know from your fitness tracker if you slept 7 hours or not.
Or if we ask you to do aerobic exercise for 30 minutes every day,
again, you will see it.
So we call it automatic check-in.
So you don't need to check in.
We know that you did it and we can tell you.
We can also send you a post-exercise notification.
When to exercise, we can tell you how much water you should drink,
how much protein you should eat,
how much carbon you should consume based on the length of the exercise,
but also based on your biomarker composition and all of that.
We also developed something that allows you to receive a report every week
about whatever you've done with the fitness tracker
because today you receive a lot of information,
but you don't know what to do.
So we are basically providing to you information
about how the data that we receive from the fitness tracker
influence your health span.
So if you, your step in that week is too much or too little,
your sleep, your VO2 max, your HRD and so on.
So that is a high level story.
Just to finish, we today have hundreds of thousands of users.
The majority of them are American,
let's say 90% American, 5% Canadian,
and the rest are all over the world.
But still, my goal is to serve everyone in the world,
so I'm looking forward to serve billions of people.
And to do that, I think that the best way
is to have a partnership with a big organization,
so can't we be working on a partnership plan
with a big organization to work together with them?
Any questions?
What about cortisol?
Have you noticed anything about cortisol as a bio tracker?
Is that actually relevant, or what do you think it is?
Yeah, it's very relevant.
Yeah, cortisol is a stress hormone,
and it's also important for muscle building.
So we have a market we call the testosterone-to-cortisol ratio,
because testosterone build muscle and cortisol break muscle,
so that's one.
The second is cortisol is basically emotional stress.
So when you're in a high cortisol, you have a stress,
and cortisol is a very, very important marker for sure.
Can I ask a follow-up?
The testosterone and cortisol relationship,
is that different for women?
It's not different for women,
but women have around 10 times less testosterone,
but still the testosterone is important for women as well.
We are testing testosterone.
It's very hard to test a free testosterone for women because it's really, really low.
Women are much more complex than the, unfortunately.
No, I'm talking about as a machine.
I'm not talking about anything else.
And I think that there are underserved population.
If you think about the NIH haven't demanded
to have clean control with women before, I think, 1997 or something like that.
So we don't have a lot of data about women,
and because of that, a lot of the side effects of drugs
are actually shown in women
because nobody tested the drug on women,
and so on, surprisingly, there are side effects.
So, yeah, women is something that, it is,
I think that there is a lot of needs there,
and I just came from, actually, yesterday,
from a big conference in Vegas called Health Conference.
It's a very big conference,
13,000 executives of health companies,
and I've seen a lot about women's health.
So I think that if anyone wants to do something about women's health,
I think that it's a great time to do it.
There is a lot of needs,
and there are also a lot of excitement, I think,
from the funders and from the society.
So, absolutely, women's health is an important part.
What heuristics do you usually try and optimize for
when you're talking about, like, you're giving people plans, right?
Is it just longevity, or are you working for, like, quality of life?
Like, how do you optimize all of that in such a way that it works?
Oh, yes, it's a good question.
So each of our users, we have something we call an action plan.
So the user, what happens is we collect all the information from you,
and then we run it against our database of a lot of recommendations,
and we feed the best recommendation for you.
But part of it is also a goal.
So you can come and say, my goal is to sleep better,
my goal is to de-stress, my goal is, I don't know, to run faster,
my goal is to lose fat.
So we have around 12 goals like that,
and based on that, we're optimizing the recommendation for that goal.
Okay.
That sounds good.
How are you integrating all the data together,
and who's making the decisions on what needs to happen?
Does the physician quite understand all the different biomarkers?
No, it's all automated software-based.
So we don't have a physician that make the decision here.
It's all.
We have a physician, when we send you to the lab,
based on regulation, physician need to subscribe to the lab sleep,
and physician need to review the result
to see that there is not a panic value
or any market outside of the normal.
So we have a physician for that.
But the physician is not involved at all with the recommendation.
It's all software.
Using yourself as an example,
can you change just how your behavior has changed?
Yeah, it changed a lot.
I can give you a few examples.
So I haven't spoke about that,
but we also developed, based on DNA,
and DNA-related scores.
One of them is grip strength.
I don't know if you know,
but grip strength is a good indicator of longevity.
So if you have a lower grip strength,
again, statistical doesn't say a lot,
but statistical people with lower grip strength
usually live shorter.
So I tested and we have like 10 different polygenic scores
related to longevity.
One is bone mineral density and visceral fat,
but my grip strength was in the lower 2%.
So basically, I have a very low,
and I tested it.
There is a magnometer.
It's basically a machine that you can,
you can buy it in Amazon in 20 bucks,
and you can measure your grip strength.
And I realized, like, yeah, it is low.
So now I'm doing like crossfit like four or five times a week
in order to improve my muscle.
So again, the grip strength is not as important
as your muscle mass.
Why is it so important?
Because when we are getting older,
we tend to fall.
When you fall, if you have muscle,
it protects the bones.
If you don't have muscle,
the bone will break.
Now, when the bone breaks,
especially if you are above 65,
there are statistics that show
that 70% of people that break their hip
are dying within a year
after they are breaking their hip.
So again, it's something that I adopted for that.
I have traditionally issues
with high cholesterol,
so I'm consuming oatmeal every day.
I hate avocado.
I didn't like avocado,
but one of my recommendations
was to eat avocado to improve my lipids.
So I'm now consuming avocado,
and I started to like avocado,
because now I understand that it's good for me.
So those are a few examples,
but I have many examples.
Yeah.
Is there any, like you said,
like the old, getting old,
I guess there are various studies
that show by taking intake of proteins,
so it gets improved.
Is there a, like, you track in your system,
is there any way to tracking the progress,
like the old people who are increasing
the intake of the protein,
and they have improved?
Yeah.
So we are around for,
let's say,
more than a decade,
so we cannot yet track longevity,
but what we can track is,
for example,
and we submitted a paper for that,
we looked at our population,
and we have tens of thousands of people
that tested many times.
So, for example,
if you look at subcodes of people
that started with high LDL,
and you look at them for more than six tests
in the follow-up,
we see that they improve the LDL,
continue to stay stable,
and even improve it more.
So what we see with our platform right now
is that our users improve the biomarker
related to the LDL,
glucose, inflammation,
cortisol,
and other,
but we cannot say,
I cannot say,
and again,
it's correlation,
because I have a free range of humans,
I haven't,
I don't have a control,
so you need to remember that,
it's very important for scientists
to remember that we don't have a control,
but we have a very good data
of hundreds of thousands of people
that show that statistically they improve,
more than that,
we looked at that subpopulation,
and someone asked about integration,
so we looked at this subpopulation
and looked at improver and not improvers,
and we separated them
and started to look
what is different in their fitness tracker data,
and what we realized
that people that improve LDL cholesterol,
on average,
are starting to accumulate much more steps
than people that don't improve LDL cholesterol.
So we are starting to have multimodality information
that allow us to understand better a human body
in an end of one,
but also in a population way.
Is there a way to isolate the change
in how you live life, right?
Because if you go to purchase such a product,
you're kind of saying,
okay, I want to do something good for my body,
probably you will try to walk more,
or you will try to do other stuff.
Is there any,
are you looking at the decay of the effect,
decay to see what happens after
they may ditch some patterns
that they adopted
when they consume your product?
Yeah.
What is interesting is that
we are a very complex machine.
So every time that I'm testing,
I have a surprise
that some are coming from the left
or from the right.
So I'm working on my glucose,
suddenly my vitamin B12 is low,
and I'm working on that,
and the cortisol is going high.
So I think that what is nice about it,
it's like a lifetime endeavor.
It's not like a quickie.
And every time that you do that,
you find other issues that you have.
So yeah, you have the decay,
but if you are dedicated enough
and testing long enough,
you're starting to see
that a new thing coming.
And also, it's very important
for everything that you measure
to have a baseline.
So if you have a baseline,
even if the value is normal,
and it starts to creep up,
does mean that you have an issue.
And for that, we develop,
again, I haven't mentioned that,
but we develop something
called optimal range.
So we have the normal range
and we have the optimal range.
And the optimal range,
we develop it based on your age
and gender and ethnicity
and active activity,
so it's much narrower.
So even if you are normal,
but if you are not optimal,
it's better for you
to get into the optimal.
So it's a tough life.
I don't know anyone
in the InsoTracker user
that optimized all these markers.
So it's very hard to do it.
For people who ended up
either kind of giving up
or quitting the program,
I'm curious if you've discovered
any reasons of people
who do that?
Can you ask again?
I didn't understand.
So for people who ended up
kind of quitting the program
or ended up giving up,
deciding to leave,
I'm curious if what are the reasons
they've discovered?
Yeah, it's a good question.
I think that at first,
I think that the program,
and it's not only InsoTracker,
it's still complex.
So it's good for,
let's say,
and I think that's a good lesson
for you.
When you start building a platform,
you start it for the early,
early adapter.
Usually in our domain,
it's the biohackers
and the executive of other companies
that want to test your product
and they copy cut it
and stuff like that.
Plus, usually that's the beginning.
You get to hundreds
to a thousand users.
And then you move
to another stage
that it's the early adapter.
It's not early, early.
So people that are a bit less early,
but they're still early.
So they will be willing
to take the risk.
And then you're starting
to get with time
to less and less early
and more majority.
We are still in the early adapter
having hundreds of thousands
out of,
I don't know,
only in the US
you have more than 300 million.
It's still early.
So I think that something
that this domain should do
is make it as simple as possible
and also build it
as an onion in a way
that at the beginning
it's very simple.
But if someone wants to click
or double click
and go deeper and deeper
it should be engaging enough
for someone
that wants to understand
and go deeper.
But it should be
as simple as possible
for someone
that they just want
to look at the information
and go 10 seconds a day.
That's what most people
want to do.
Sometimes I want to do it
for a minute or 10 minutes
but don't force me
to do it a minute
because I don't have time.
Facebook is fun.
Every day I'm sick
or for you is TikTok.
It's fun
but everything is changing.
You need to
and also you need
to build it in a way
that the notification
that you're sending
to the user
are not the same every day.
It should be interesting.
So I try to make it
a mix and match
and make it interesting
and exciting
and sometimes
hit them with the stick.
That's okay
but don't hit them
with the stick every day.
Nobody likes to say
you're bad, you're bad, you're bad, you're bad.
So we need to mix and match it.
I hope that I answered
your question.
Thanks.
Okay.
Have you been able
to sell the data
to Liger health insurance companies?
No.
We haven't done it
but we have a lot
of interest
from companies
that develop
drugs
and all of that
and they are coming
to us
and want us
to do a research
and help them
to develop it
or call us.
Yeah.
But we haven't started
to any
health insurance
on our insurance.
I think we got
maybe one more question.
So you
spoke earlier
about the relationship
between
longevity
and hand group.
What do you suggest
as a way
of life?
Is it more important
to have
a bigger muscle mass
or is it
better for
or is it
cardio better?
Way something
versus running.
Cardio versus
cardio.
Okay.
You're asking
endurance versus
strength.
Yep.
Both of them
are very important
I have to say.
So endurance
is important
for the
cardiovascular
system
and strength
is very important
for your longevity.
So you need
to find a balance.
I can tell you
what I'm doing.
So I'm lifting weight
four times a week
and I like cycling
and also it's hard
for me to run
with my knees
so I'm doing cycling
like twice a week
and the last week
I'm doing yoga
because it's good also.
You get the balance
and also you get
stretching your mass
but it's hard.
A lot of my friends
in my age
like to play pickleball
and I like it
but I don't have time
for that
because I'm
spending enough
time in the gym.
So you need
to find again
you need to optimize
your life
to do what
is good for you
and when I realized
that I have
a problem
with my grip strength
I did like
cross it
almost every day
but now
when I build
the muscle
now I'm a maintainer
so I can start
moving more
from the endurance
so it's always
a balance
that you need
to maintain.
Hopefully
I answered your question.
Yes, yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
