Hi everyone, so I am going to talk about rethinking our relationship with age identity.
So typically if someone, if you meet someone and they say my name is Michael, you don't question
them about their name, you don't say but what is your real name, what's in your birth certificate?
And if someone tells you I'm agender, I don't identify with gender, I'm non-binary, you don't
follow that up by asking okay but what's on your birth certificate or like are you more boy or girl
or like what's your questions like that. So this is because we acknowledge and respect the identity
that people have chosen for themselves. So today we'd like to explore how these same principles of
respect and self-determination might apply to age identity.
So we readily accept name changes and for various reasons like marriage and gender transition
and religious and spiritual reasons and just personal preference without demanding documentation.
And over the past 50 years or so we've gradually adapted to doing that with gender as well
from binary determined at birth to a spectrum of understanding. So why is this? It's because we
are learning to respect self-determination for individuals in a number of areas
while freeing ourselves from social constructs that may not necessarily fit us.
So let's talk about the age construct. The age construct comes in many different
forms including chronological or calendar based, biological via various markers like cellular
health and physical markers, psychological such as mental and emotional development and
expectations, and social or role based. And some of you may be familiar with the counterclockwise
experiment done in 1979 where, her name isn't up there, but Ellen Langer showed how mental age
perception affects physical health. What she did is she gathered some elderly people in a place where they
were in an environment where they lived as if it was 20 years ago. And within just five days they showed
remarkable improvements in their physical and cognitive function.
also the scope of this talk will be on age of legal majority enough just because it will get easier this way.
So what key, what benefits can there be, can we see from surrendering the age identity construct? We can see cognitive
improvements in neuroplasticity and reducing our self-limiting beliefs. We can improve our
social connections and reduce discrimination. We can dissolve cultural barriers by surrendering these constructs
and so-called generational barriers and even dissolve the idea of generational barriers itself.
And also we can use the placebo effect to our advantage and overcome a lot of things that we believe about age thresholds,
such as once you're past age X, you can't do Y anymore and you need to do Z.
And even things such as physical health feel to this concept as that one experiment showed. So to finish up my
talk part is I just want to say that just as we've evolved in our understanding of names and gender,
perhaps it's time to evolve in our understanding of age. The question isn't how old you are,
but who you are and what you're doing. Thank you.
One, one, one. Which one do you guys think is your best question?
I don't know the question, but I agree 100 percent. Ageism is a real thing, especially in dating.
There's a lot of people online that are ageist and it's disgusting, but that comes with time,
I guess, you know, making people more aware of it. But I agree with the premise, right? It's not,
it's not, it's not how old you are, but you know, what value do you offer and what consenting adults
choose to do or not do, right? Shouldn't matter. Age or term of age. Agreed.
Thank you.
