Mapping Emotion Semantics Across 2,500 Languages - Claude
New chat
Chats
Recents
AI-Generated Secular Religions Experiment
Nihilistic Anxiety and Technological Restlessness
Epistemic Alchemy: Hacking Reality
Critique of AI Deployment and Control
Neighbor Lockout Rescue Mission
Oscillatory Semantics and Embodied Cognition in the TARTAN Framework
Arxula adeninivorans: Versatile Yeast for Biotechnology
Time Spent Updating GitHub README Over a Year
Brain-Inspired Credit Assignment Algorithms in Neural Networks
18-Year Calendar with Elemental Animals
Mapping Emotion Semantics Across 2,500 Languages
Critical Cultural Analyses in "We're In Hell" Podcast
Escape from Gethsemane
The Drying Paint Saga
Alphabetized List of Obscure Terms
Words Between "Virtual" and "Visual"
Exploring the Meaning of the Chinese Name 路晏
The Process of Creative Destruction in Economics
Crumpled Planet Blender Script
Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morals
Key Propositional Calculus Concepts
Comprehensive Guide to Logical Symbols
NG
Nate Guimond
Free plan
Mapping Emotion Semantics Across 2,500 Languages
Share
NG
Back To Vol. 366, No. 6472
Full access
Report
Share on
Emotion semantics show both cultural variation and universal structure
Joshua Conrad Jackson
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2947-9815
, Joseph Watts
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7737-273X
, [...], and Kristen A. Lindquist
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5368-9302
+6 authorsAuthors Info & Affiliations
Science
20 Dec 2019
Vol 366, Issue 6472
pp. 1517-1522
DOI: 10.1126/science.aaw8160
38,119
105
Metrics
Total Downloads
38,119
Last 6 Months
10,202
Last 12 Months
29,125
Total Citations
105
Last 6 Months
0
Last 12 Months
1
The diverse way that languages convey emotion
Abstract
Acknowledgments
Supplementary Material
References and Notes
eLetters (0)
Information & Authors
Metrics & Citations
View Options
References
Media
Share
The diverse way that languages convey emotion
It is unclear whether emotion terms have the same meaning across cultures. Jackson et al. examined nearly 2500 languages to determine the degree of similarity in linguistic networks of 24 emotion terms across cultures (see the Perspective by Majid). There were low levels of similarity, and thus high variability, in the meaning of emotion terms across cultures. Similarity of emotion terms could be predicted on the basis of the geographic proximity of the languages they originate from, their hedonic valence, and the physiological arousal they evoke.
Science, this issue p. 1517; see also p. 1444
Abstract
Many human languages have words for emotions such as "anger" and "fear," yet it is not clear whether these emotions have similar meanings across languages, or why their meanings might vary. We estimate emotion semantics across a sample of 2474 spoken languages using "colexification"—a phenomenon in which languages name semantically related concepts with the same word. Analyses show significant variation in networks of emotion concept colexification, which is predicted by the geographic proximity of language families. We also find evidence of universal structure in emotion colexification networks, with all families differentiating emotions primarily on the basis of hedonic valence and physiological activation. Our findings contribute to debates about universality and diversity in how humans understand and experience emotion.
SIGN UP FOR FIRST RELEASE ALERTS!
Get the latest First Release papers from Science delivered right to you!
Many human languages have rich vocabularies devoted to communicating emotions. Although not all emotion words are common—the German word Sehnsucht refers to a strong desire for an alternative life and has no direct translation in English—there are many words that appear to name similar emotional states across the world's spoken languages. Translation dictionaries, for example, suggest that the English word love can be equated with the Turkish word sevgi and the Hungarian word szerelem. But does this mean that the concept of "love" is the same in English, Turkish, and Hungarian? Here, we explore this question by examining the meaning of emotion concepts in a sample of 2474 languages from 20 major language families. Using a new method from comparative linguistics, we examine sources of variation and structure in emotion semantics across this global sample of languages.
Early theories of emotion, drawing from Darwin (1), suggested that there are a discrete number of universal emotions from which all other emotions are derived (2-4). Many of these theories claimed that, just as there are primary colors (e.g., yellow, red), there may be primary emotions (e.g., anger, sadness) that evolved in mammalian brains (4). In turn, many languages may develop words for primary emotion concepts such as "anger" and "sadness" because these concepts name experiences derived from universal biological structures that are shared by all humans (2-4). These theories do allow for cultural and linguistic variation in emotion, but tend not to model or predict this variation.
There is a growing recognition, however, that emotions can vary systematically in their meaning and experience across culture and language (5-7). Constructionist models of emotion in particular claim that concepts such as "anger" and "sadness" do not derive from dedicated brain structures (8), but occur when humans make socially learned inferences about the meaning of basic physiological processes linked to maintaining the body's homeostasis (9, 10). The meaning of emotion concepts (i.e., "emotion semantics") should thus draw from both culturally evolved conceptualizations as well as biologically evolved physiology.
If cultural evolutionary processes shape the meaning of emotion concepts, the historical relationships between language groups should predict which languages have the most similar emotion semantics. Language groups in closer geographic proximity are the most likely to engage in borrowing (the sharing of concepts, norms, etc.) and also tend to share more recent common ancestors than geographically distant groups (11). We thus hypothesize that emotion semantics are associated with a language group's geographic location: Language groups in close geographic proximity may have more similar emotion semantics than distant groups. Although cultural variation in emotion is plausible under many models of emotion, a link between geographic distance and emotion semantics would support constructionism's claim that emotions are conceptualized using social learning.
Biologically evolved physiology should provide universal structure to emotion semantics, but the exact sources of this structure are not clear. Constructionist models of emotion emphasize the roles of valence—the hedonic pleasantness versus unpleasantness of emotions—and activation—the physiological arousal associated with experiencing emotions (8-10). According to these models, valence and activation reflect basic neurophysiological processes that signal when the body shifts away from homeostasis (9), and the universal importance of these processes may lead all languages to differentiate emotions primarily on the basis of their degree of valence and activation. Other accounts, however, suggest that factors such as dominance, certainty, sociality, and approach-avoidance may also represent universal dimensions of variance in emotion semantics (12-15).
Predictions about the influence of culture and biology on emotion have long been examined and debated, yet findings from past studies are mixed. An early study found that human subjects from remote Papua New Guinea matched posed facial expressions to emotional situations at similar rates to North Americans (16), whereas recent field studies among other small-scale societies have found considerably more cultural variability in people's conceptualization of emotion (17). These mixed results may be due to methodological limitations of past research. Owing to logistical challenges, the vast majority of cross-cultural studies have been two-group comparisons (17), and the few multigroup studies on emotion have sampled predominantly from industrial and globalized nations (18, 19). Moreover, human subject-based studies seldom present emotions as they naturally occur, instead using posed facial expressions, fictional vignettes, and exaggerated vocalizations as test stimuli. Finally, human subject-based studies may be susceptible to demand characteristics and researcher bias: Studies with imposed training phases and forced choice paradigms have found evidence for universal recognition of emotion (16), whereas studies with fewer constraints have found more cultural variability (17).
As an alternative to human subjects-based research, analyses of naturally occurring language can have high ecological validity and do not rely on human subject recruitment. Language may be an imprecise metric of experience, but analyzing how people use words can reveal how they experience emotions as similar or different. Several linguistic studies have conducted these analyses by qualitatively comparing the meaning of emotion words by searching for semantic primitives that have similar meanings across many languages (20). Yet few studies have quantitatively compared the meaning of emotion words because the field lacks metrics that quantify the semantic distance between words such as the English love and the Turkish sevgi (21).
To overcome this challenge, we take a new quantitative approach to estimate variability and structure in emotion semantics. Our approach examines cases of colexification, instances in which multiple concepts are coexpressed by the same word form within a language. Colexifications are useful for addressing questions about semantic structure because they often arise when two concepts are perceived as conceptually similar (22, 23) (see fig. S5). Persian, for instance, uses the word-form ænduh to express both the concepts of "grief" and "regret," whereas the Sirkhi dialect of Dargwa uses the word-form dard to express both the concepts of "grief" and "anxiety." Persian speakers may therefore understand "grief" as an emotion more similar to "regret," whereas Dargwa speakers may understand "grief" as more similar to "anxiety."
Past research has used colexification patterns across languages to examine the semantic structure of non-emotion concepts. Youn and colleagues coded dictionaries from 81 languages to show that concepts such as "sun," "river," "mountain," and "hill" had universal patterns of colexification that reflected concepts' material and functional properties (21). For instance, languages were more likely to colexify concepts such as "water" and "sea," than concepts such as "sun" and "water," implying that speakers of these languages viewed "water" and "sea" as semantically similar concepts and "sun" and "water" as distinct. We use a similar approach to estimate the variation and structure of emotion semantics across language families.
To gather a high-powered sample, we computationally aggregated colexifications into a database of cross-linguistic colexifications (CLICS) featuring 2474 languages and 2439 distinct concepts—including 24 emotion concepts. We then used a random walk probability procedure to generate colexification networks (24). In these networks, nodes represented emotion concepts, and edges represented colexifications between these concepts, weighted by the number of languages that possessed a particular colexification. We used this procedure to construct a network for all languages in our database, and then for 20 individual language families whose colexification networks had a significant level of modularity (ps < 0.001). Although nodes in each language family network were labeled with the same emotion concepts ("anger"), comparing patterns of colexification across language families allowed us to test whether these nodes actually showed universal semantic equivalence or whether their patterns of association reflected semantic variation (see supplementary text for more details).
A key step in these network comparisons involved identifying communities: clusters of emotion concepts that are more tightly colexified with one another than with emotion concepts outside of the community. For each network, we computed community structure using the Cluster Optimal algorithm (25). Figure 1Opens in image viewer displays the global colexification network and the five largest language family-specific networks, and fig. S1 displays the remaining language families. Family-specific colexification networks allowed us to estimate global variability in emotion semantics and to predict variation and structure in emotion semantics across language families
Edit
I'll help analyze this research paper on emotion semantics across languages. Let me break down the key points and methodology.
Analysis of 'Emotion semantics show both cultural variation and universal structure'
Document
Based on what we've reviewed so far, would you like me to analyze any particular aspect in more detail? For example, we could:
Examine the specific findings about geographic proximity
Dive deeper into the network analysis methodology
Look at the implications for translation and cross-cultural communication
Retry
NG
tion that we observed in emotion semantics.
Geography partly explained variation in emotion semantics, such that geographically closer language families tended to colexify emotion concepts in more similar ways than distant language families. Geographically proximal societies often have more opportunities for contact through trade, conquest, and migration and share more recent common ancestry than distant groups (11). This suggests that historical patterns of contact and common ancestry may have shaped cross-cultural variation in how people conceptualize emotions. We encourage future research to examine the specific vertical and horizontal transmission processes that give rise to geographic variation in emotion semantics.
Despite this variation, we find evidence for a common underlying structure in the meaning of emotion concepts across languages. Valence and physiological activation—which are linked to neurophysiological systems that maintain homeostasis (9)—served as universal constraints to variability in emotion semantics. Positively and negatively valenced emotions seldom belonged to the same colexification communities, although there were notable exceptions to this pattern. For example, some Austronesian languages colexified the concepts of "pity" and "love," which implies that these languages may conceptualize "pity" as a more positive (or "love" as a more negative) concept than other languages. The ability of valence and activation to consistently predict structure in emotion semantics across language families suggests that these are common psychophysiological dimensions shared by all humans.
Questions about the meaning of human emotions are age-old, and debate about the nature of emotion persists in scientific literature. The colexification approach that we take here provides a new method and a set of metrics to answer these questions by creating vast networks of how people use words to name experiences. Analyzing these networks sheds light on the cultural and biological evolutionary mechanisms underlying how emotions are ascribed meaning in languages around the world. Although debates about the relationship between language and conscious experience are notoriously difficult to resolve (28), our findings also raise the intriguing possibility that emotion experiences vary systematically across cultural groups. More broadly, our study shows the value of combining large comparative linguistic databases with quantitative network methods. Analyzing the diverse ways that people use language promises to yield insights into human cognition on an unprecedented scale.
Edit
Let me analyze this concluding section of the paper which presents the key findings and their implications.
Analysis of Key Findings and Implications
Document
The findings present a nuanced view of emotion semantics that bridges traditional universalist and constructionist perspectives. Would you like to explore:
The specific implications for cross-cultural communication and translation?
How this research might inform our understanding of emotional intelligence across cultures?
The methodological innovations and their potential applications to other domains?
Retry
NG
What are some of specific implications for cross-cultural communication.
Edit
I'll analyze the specific implications this research has for cross-cultural communication.
Cross-Cultural Communication Implications from Emotion Semantics Research
Document
Would you like to explore any particular aspect of these implications in more detail? For example, we could:
Develop specific communication strategies for a particular cultural context
Examine how these findings might apply to international business negotiations
Look at practical applications for mental health professionals working across cultures
Retry
Claude can make mistakes.
Please double-check responses.
Sonnet 4
Copy
Publish
Chat controls
Sonnet 4
Smart, efficient model for everyday use
Learn more
Artifacts
Analysis of 'Emotion semantics show both cultural variation and universal structure'
Click to open document • 1 version
Analysis of Key Findings and Implications
Click to open document • 1 version
Cross-Cultural Communication Implications from Emotion Semantics Research
Click to open document • 1 version
Content
No content added yet
Add images, PDFs, docs, spreadsheets, and more to summarize, analyze, and query content with Claude.



reCAPTCHA
Recaptcha requires verification.
Privacy
-
Terms
protected by
reCAPTCHA
Privacy
-
Terms







