Experience
Author(s): B. A. Farrell
Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of the Mind Association
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
access to Mind

II.-EXPERIENCE
I WANT to deal with a question that bothers physiologists and
psychologists. It is a familiar question for philosophers, but I
want to deal with it as it appears to them, not to us. Consequently, I shall begin by explaining at some length how the
problem does arise for them.
Adrian, in The Basis of Sensation, said many years ago that
"whatever our views about the relation between mind and
body, we cannot escape the fact that there is an unsatisfactory
gap between two such events as the sticking of a pin into my
finger and the appearance of a sensation of pain in my consciousness. Part of the gap is obviously made up of events in
my sensory nerves and brain." In his Waynflete lectures,
The Physical Background of Perception, he purports to fill the
gap even further by telling us about the structure and activity
of the brain. He discusses the nature of the mechanism which
would be needed to copy the activity of the brain-in particular,
the activity of recognising significant relations and of learning
skilled movements. After suggesting the sort of material events
and changes that must occur in the brain to account for this
sort of activity, he says " Yet there remains the formidable
problem of the intervening events. The human mind comes in
somewhere in the chain of causation between the physical events
in the sensory and the motor pathways." Mental events, he
goes on, must be closely connected with the material process
going on in the cortex, and we must try to make such a connexion
seem plausible. In an endeavour to make this connexion seem
plausible, he discusses the suggestions of Kenneth Craik and
