person sees things, thinks, and so on, it is obviously not true
that all that is going on are the material processes that we
physiologists describe. Certain mental processes are also going
on. He is having certain sensations and feelings. In general,
he is having certain experiences. And it is this that we have to
leave out and cannot cope with."
But at this point the physiologists,, like the plain man, are apt
to get an idea, and to turn with relief, if not with hope, to
psychology. " It is the business of psychology ", they may say,
" to deal with our sensations and feelings. And if it would only
hurry up, then, with the physiological account of the neural
basis of experience, the two sciences jointly might be able to
ofler a presentable account of what happens when we see and
feel ", etc. This is a very reasonable and obvious appeal for
assistance, since the psychologists do almost invariably and expressly accept " experience " as falling within the subject matter
of the science. Almost invariably, they describe the subject
matter as covering both " behaviour and experience ".1 Presumably therefore they do claim to give a scientific account of both.
1 This conjunction soon becomes familiar to anyone perusing the textbooks, e.g. Thouless, General and Social Psychology, Ch. I. In Boring,
Langfeld and Weld (ed.), Foundations of Psychology (1948), the conjunction appears as " behaviour and consciousness ".


Let us remind ourselves how psychologists do set to work to
deal with " experience "-with our sensations, our feelings, and
so on; and what sorts of discoveries they make about them.
Consider sensation. What a psychologist does is to take a
Mr. X and use him as a subject in a laboratory. He might use
Mr. X as a subject by, for example, subjecting him to the important classes of stimuli that aire likely to affect X's sense organs
z., mechanical, thermal, acoustic, chemical and photic
stimuli. In this way he will discover from X's responses and
discriminations whether X's sensitivity is normal or notwhether, for instance, X is colour blind or not, or has abnormally
acute acoustic sensitivity, and so on. Or he might vary the
stimuli in respect of their quality, intensity, extension or duration in order to discover whether X's responses show corresponding variations. The sort of generalisation the psychologist
produces is exemplified in the Weber Law about differential
thresholds, and later modifications of this; or in a generalisation
about the primary qualities of the stimuli in question from which
all other qualities are obtained (e.g., " in vision, the primaries
