by the old unpalatable alternative. To get rid of " experience "
can only be done by denying that we have sensations, etc., or by
refusing to bother with them. But to assert that we do not
have sensations, or that no experiences occur, is to assert what
is palpable false; and to refuse to bother with them is to leave

out certain phenomena, or aspects of phenomena, that psychologists are supposed to investigate.
Some psychologists, chiefly American I think, have paraded

their embarrassments (being less inhibited than their British
colleagues), and have tried to deal with them. For example,
Tolman (of California), in his Purposive Behaviour in Animals
and Men, distinguishes between discriminations, discriminatory
readinesses and so forth, on the one hand, and what a psychology
of discriminations leaves out on the other. What it leaves out
he calls " raw feels ". These raw feels, he says, are not capable
of scientific treatment, and he admits at the end of the book that
he does not know what on earth to do with them. He suggests
three scrap heaps on to which they may be thrown. They may
be ignored as scientific will of the wisps. They may be assumed
to correlate consistently with our responses and response readinesses, so that in so far as X and Y behave alike they have the
same sort of experience. Thirdly, "Raw feels may be the way
physical realities are intrinsically" so that, e.g., experienced
qualities may be " the intrinsic nature of a nervous process ".
By contrast, Boring (of Harvard) will stand no such metaphysical'nonsense. In The Physical Dimensions of Consciousness
(note the word " physical "), and again in a more recent article,'
he has argued like this. In the early stages of our physiology
and psychology, interaction seems the obvious answer, because
we find stimulus causing sensation and sensation causing movement. But as our knowledge advances, psycho-physical parallelism is suggested, because sensation then seems to parallel
some middle part of the series of material events, between, say,
the prick of the pin and the jerking away of my arm. But
1 " Mind and Mechanism" in The American Journal of Psychology,
April, 1946.

EXPERIENCE

