
were our knowledge to be complete, so that we had a perfect
correlation between sensation and neural process, we should
then identify the two. We are not inclined to do so now, but
we will, when the time comes. And he proposes to hurry up
the transition a bit by doing some propaganda himself and
saying " Neural process and sensation are identical ".

First steps: "behaviour " and " experience ".
Well, what can be done about this ? Let me simplify the
question by talking for the most part about that form of experience we call sensation.

Suppose subject X is asked in a laboratory: " Please tell me
what you are seeing now "; and suppose he answers: " I see
a red patch ". Now take the sentence: " If we merely consider
all the dif[erential responses and readinesses, and such like, that
X exhibits towards the stimulus of a red shape, we are leaving
out the experience he has when he looks at it ". I shall call
this sentence 'A' for short. It is, no doubt, only a sentence
that someone doing psychology would ever utter. But, when we
appreciate this, it seems quite a straightforward sort of remark,
with nothing odd about it. It has this appearance because it
seems to resemble quite ordinary remarks like the following.
Sentence 1. " If you merely consider what Y says and does,
you leave out what he really feels behind that inscrutable face
of his." Sentence A resembles sentence 1 in that both are
apparently saying that, if you rely only on the publicly observable behaviour of the person, you will be ignoring his private
experience; and you may be wrong in the guesses you make
about it. It is quite sensible and often true to utter sentence 1,
or something like it. Why not also sentence A ?
Sentence 2. " If you only consider the obvious overt behaviour of an ape when solving one of KShler's problems (e.g.,
getting the banana from the roof by piling up boxes on each
other and climbing up), you leave out that when it sat still once
or twice, it was obviously doing something like 'cogitating'
about the problem." And
Sentence 3. " If we just treat a small child as a bundle of
