attention to the odd and stretched use of " behaviour" we are
now employing. For, in order to show that what we are alleged
to be leaving out is something very odd, we stretch the word
" behaviour " to cover, at least, the covert verbal and other
responses of the person, his response readinesses, all his relevant
bodily states, and all the possible discriminations he can make
to the presented red shape. But, in spite of this stretching, we
are still dissatisfied. We still want to draw a line between X's
behaviour in this sense and his experience. We want to do so

because this distinction still seems to have a point here. For
example, we still want to pose the schoolboy question: " When
X and Y both look at a red patch, and show no discoverable
differences of response, how do we know that what X sees is
like what Y sees ?-that their experience is qualitatively identical ? ". We still want to say that when a congenitally blind
person has his sight restored, it is not simply the case that he

now does and can respond differentially to a new range of stimuli.
We want to say that his experience is now qualitatively different.
We still want to distinguish between robots and men by saying
that the former have no sensations. We also want to use this
distinction between " behaviour " and " experience " whenever
we think of the Martians, or of the " men whose heads do grow
beneath their shoulders " and wonder what it would be like to
be one of them. To stick to this distinction seems to be the
only way of satisfying our wants here and of talking like this.
So even if it be true (as Mace alleges it is 1) that " statements
about mind or consciousness just turn out to be, on analysis,
statements about the behaviour of material things ", we still
feel like retorting that this is at best only true for psychological
purposes, and in any case, so much the worse for the psychology
that demands such a result.
Now I could go through these queer and difficult cases at once
1 " Some Implications of Analytical Behaviourism ", Arist. Soc. Proc.,
1948-49.

