The " hopeless can't " seems appropriate where -our discriminatory repertoire is poor, and where, from whatever causes, the
stimulus (or object in question) produces emotional responses
that a description cannot do, no matter how imaginative the
listener may be. This points. out where the distinction between
" We- can/We can't describe the experience " is useful. It is
useful to say we can't describe the R. V. W. Epilogue, in order
to distinguish it from relatively simple and humdrum experiences
like going for a ride on a bus or having pins and needles. It is
useless to say we can't describe the R. V. W. Epilogue, if we
wish thereby to stress the likeness between the raw feel experience of seeing a red patch and the experience of hearing the
Epilogue.
Let me try to deal briefly with this in a different way. Suppose
we still feel like saying (Moore-wise, perhaps): " But we just
do know what it is like to have the experience of looking at a red
disc, and we just do know how this differs from looking at a
green one ". Presumably we would say that a rat, once trained
to discriminate between a red and a green disc, had the experience (in some primitive way) of seeing a red disc. But we

would hesitate to say that it knew that it had this experience

or knew what it was like to have this sort of experience. Well,
then, what is true of us that is not true of the rat ? Looking
at it psychologically, we can react to our own responses to the
.disc by means of substitute, or symbolic, behaviour, and the
rat cannot do so. When I, or you, claim to know what our
experience of looking at a red disc is like, we imply, in part,
that we are able to react symbolically to our response of " looking
at a red disc ". What we react to in this way is the pattern of
stimulation produced by this response of " looking ". Again, I
may react symbolically to a pattern of stimulation that is called
" a behavioural readiness " to respond to this red disc as I have
responded to others in the past; and I may then say: " Oh,
there's something very familiar about this red disc ", or something of the sort. When, therefore, I say: " I just know what
it is like to have the experience of looking at a red disc ", I am
saying, for psychological purposes, that I have the capacity to
discriminate my own responses in the same sort of way as I
