that I should become a privileged observer here also; and it is
this wonder what it would be like to be a privileged observer
that leads us to say there is something more to be learnt about
the Martian, namely, " What his experience is like ".
But our wonder about the Martian is quite different from our
wonder about the opium smoker. For what we want to know
about the Martian is something that no privileged observer can
give himself or us. Suppose I become an opium smoker and I
then say: " I now know what it is like to be one ". What do
I know here ? In part, I know the sort of thing I could embody
in " Confessions of an Opium Smoker "; the' sort of dreams the
smoker has; how habit forming goes on so that ultimately his
whole life becomes dominated by the drug. If I am confronted by
another alleged opium smoker, my knowledge is such that I may
be able to uise it to help determine whether the other man really
is an opium addict, or whether he is just lying or putting over
an act. In part, also, what I know here is something that can
be discussed in a court of law or by medical psychologists. My
claim to have this knowledge may be rejected by them, wrongly,
as bogus, or it may be accepted as veridical, when in fact it is
bogus. In short, when I take up opium smoking and learn
what it is like to be an opium smoker, what I learn is a lot about
the expandable and describable experience of the smoker. Or,
to put it differently and paradoxically, I do not learn anything
more about it except what the scientific methods of the nonprivileged observer are still too clumsy to discover for themselves. All, therefore, that happens when I become a privileged
observer is that I give myself the opportunity of making certain
observations for myself. I give myself the opportunity of
making the same discriminations, etc., as the opium smoker, of
learning to react to these' as he does, and so of coming to " know
what it is like to be an opium smoker ".

EXPERIENCE


-What, however, we want to know about the Martian is quite
other than this. It must be, because if it were not, there would
