be no point in distinguishing between " behaviour " and
" experience " in our talk about him. The ' " experience " of
the Martian would then be assimilable under " behaviour " in
the way we have just suggested for the opium smoker. It is
perfectly sensible to wonder what it would be like to be a Martian
if we are thinking of one of us becoming a privileged observer.
But clearly we cannot only be thinking of this because this supposition is not enough. In fact, it is not what we want at all.
For, as we have seen, if I were to become a privileged observer,
I could still only come to learn what it was like to be a Martian
as I come to learn what it is like to be an opium smoker.
I would still not have learnt what the Martian's "experience "
was like in the sense in which we purport to be interested. The
same puzzle, of course, can be raised about the opium smoker
also. We can wonder what it would be like to be an opium
smoker, in the sort of way in which we would remain dissatisfied
with the knowledge that a privileged observer comes to possess.
But it is easier to spot the sources of the puzzle here than in the
case of the Martian. So when we feel the urge to say that
" there is something more to be learnt about the Martian than
his actual and possible responses " (viz., " what his experience
is like "), we feel this urge partly because we have overlooked
the difference between saying: " I wonder what it would be
like to be a Martian ", and " I wonder what it would be like to
be an opium smoker " -.a difference that makes the former
wonder pointless and the latter sensible.

(b) " Knowing at first hand ".
But this still leaves us dissatisfied for various reasons. Consider one of them. "When I take up opium smoking, I do not
only get the chance of making certain discriminations, etc., that
otherwise would not be open to me. I also come to know at
first hand, or become aware at first hand of an experience that
I could not otherwise have known. When, therefore, I wonder
what it would be like to be a Martian, I am wondering what it
would be like to have first hand knowledge of the experience of
a Martian. What I am aware of here is not the sort of thing
that can be talked about at all. If it were, there would be no
