is also impossible. However, we now see that it is not contrastable with anything, because " to know the Martian's experience
at first hand " is the only way in which I can know it at all.
But then this objection simply has not given a use to the expression " to know at first hand ". We think it has because we
are mistakenly supposing that this expression is being used in
the normal way in this objection. Similar difficulties break out
when we look at what it is that we are supposed to know at
first hand, and ask whether we can be mistaken about it, and so
forth. Similar difficulties also break out for the other favourite
expressions used, such as " immediate experience ", " immediate
awareness ", "direct experience " and " direct apprehension ".
These expressions are given no use either; and because of this
they have disfigured discussions about Behaviourism and the
subject matter of psychology.' Then, because these terms do
not contrast with anything, some of us fall into the trap and
say: " Ah! we are obviously dealing with a unique and fundamental mode of cognition. Terms like 'immediate experience'
'For such a discussion see Carroll C. Pratt, The Logic of Modern

Psychology (MacMllan, N.Y., 1939).


are confusing because we continually suppose them to function
here as they do in ordinary speech. We had better, therefore,
invent a special technical term to do the job-say ' enj oyment '."
And then we are sunk in the traditional philosophical bog!
(c) " The experience of the Martian " and " the red shape"'.
But what impels us to produce this objection about knowing
at first hand? What is its point ? What impels us is the likeness between "the red shape " and " my experience " or " the
experience of the Martian ", and the point of the objection is to
draw attention to this. A red shape presents a stimulus pattern
that I react to immediately, in contrast with the surrogate
reaction by means of symbols. My experience is like a structured series of such stimulus patterns, including those produced
by my own responses, to which patterns I seem to react in the
same sort of immediate way. We now identify the properties of
the whole with the properties of a part, and suppose that " my
experience " is just like " a red shape ". We are assisted in
this by the parallel talk we use about " a (the) red shape " and
