" an (the, my) experience ". We talk about "noting a red
shape " and " noting an experience at the time "; " attendinrg
to the red shape " and " attending to the experience " ; " very
conscious of a red shape" and " very conscious of my own experience at the time "; "laughing at the red shape " and
"laughing at the experience ". And so on. That is, both
expressions function as objects of " awareness " verbs. Naturally, therefore, we are tempted to say: " I can know my experience at first hand ". The usefulness of this is that it brings
out how, for psychological parposes, " my experience " is like
a series of non-surrogate reactions to a series of stimulus patterns; and how it is like the reactions of an organism that is
only capable of reacting in a non-surrogate fashion to a series
of stimulus patterns consisting of red shapes. This comparison
of " my experience " with " a red shape " also helps us to understand why we resist the psychological move to talk about
" experience " as reactions to stimuli. For if " my experience "
is to function like " a red shape ", then this move is like sayiig:
" When you see a red shape, what you are doing is to see a mass
of almost invisible red dots ". To this the objection is that you
are then not aware of a red shape at all. So we object to this
move on the ground that it leaves out our experience altogether.
However, we do not really want to compare " an (my) ex-

perience " to " a red shape " at all. We do not really want it
to function like a stimulus word. For if it were to function like


B.

A.


this, it would be sensible to ask the embarrassing question:
" What receptors do you use to observe it ? ". Moreover, we
can see the point of saying: " I know at first hand the experience I have when I know a red shape at first hand ". But
what is the point of saying: " I know at first hand the experience I have when I know my experience at first hand " ? This is

an odd statement in that the main clause is redundant, precisely

because we are using " my experience " here to embrace everything that I know at first hand, including " my experience of my
