experience ". Yet, when we are aware of a stimulus, we may
or may not also be aware of our reaction to it, and hence of our
experience when we react to it. Further, if " my experience "
were like " a red shape " here, we should be able to talk about it
in the same sort of way as we can talk about a red shape. But
then the whole point of saying that " I know my experience at
first hand " is lost, since " my experience " is now somethinrg
describable and not just a " raw feel ". Finally, this comparison
with a red shape suggests that, when I say " I know my experience at first hand", all I am saying is: " I am reacting, or can
react, in a non-surrogate fashion to a certain stimulus pattern,
viz., my experience ". But, as we saw, this suggestion is the
very one we resist as "leaving out my experience ". Hence to
treat " my experience" as a stimulus word or expression, like
" a red shape ", as the sort of thing that I can know at first hand,
is to destroy the whole point of the distinction we want to draw
between " experience " and " behaviour " when we wonder what
it is like to be a Martian.
Incidentally, this should help to make it clear that we cannot
use introspection to observe " experience ", since this is not an
observable something. It is not the case, therefore, that when
an experimenter studies a subject he is observing the latter's

behaviour, but that when he studies himself in the role of subjectobserver, he is observing his " experience ". In both cases the
experimenter is responding to organisations of stimuli, with the
difference that in the case of the subject they are produced by.
another person, but in the case of the subject-observer they are
self-produced and the observation-response to them can only be
made from a privileged position. Consequently, what an
experimenter observes when he takes note of a subject X
reacting is not nearly as different as we are apt to think from
what he observes when he plays the role of the subject-observer
himself.'
1 In Ch. I of Found&tions of Psychology, op. cit., Professor Boring says
that " consciousness is what you experience immediately ". This comical

EXPERIENCE
