

The conclusion, then, is that our wonder about the experience
of the Martian does not require us to draw this distinction
between " experience " and " behaviour ". Our difficulty about
his experience is very like our difficulty about that of babies and
animals. The diagnosis we have outlined for the former applies,
I think, mutatis mutandis to the latter also. But while there is
yet no such subject as the psychology of Martians, there is of

babies and animals. These branches of psychology are closely
beset by the philosophical difficulty about experience that I
have been dealing with. The advantage of considering the
Martian is that this is a much more difficult case, and one on
which we are apt to fall back if we start off with infants and mice.
A difficult case: the robot.
Now what about robots ? Is there any point in keeping the
distinction between " experience " and " behaviour " in order to
distinguish between robots and ourselves'? It looks like it
because we are inclined to say: " If a robot were to behave
just like a person, it would still not have any sensations, or
feelings ". And this seems to entail saying that we have experience (in the raw feel sense), and that the robot does not have
it. But this will not do. For we mean, in part, by 'a robot'
that the thing in question has no sensations, etc., in the ordinary
sense. That is, we normally use the word 'robot' in such a
way that while it can duplicate our overt behaviour, it cannot
duplicate our internal or covert behaviour when, e.g., you say
" I'm having a funny sensation in my tummy ". But we are
not aware of this when we are inclined to say: " If a robot were
to behave just like a person, it would still not have any sensations ". When we say this, we seem to be talking simply about
the overt behaviour of the robot. But we want to talk about its
covert behaviour as well. It is only if we do this that the
objection has any force. Yet, if we do so, we depart from the
ordinary use of 'robot'. The first thing to note, therefore, is
this. All that is entailed, on the ordinary use of ' robot ', is
that while we can make the internal discriminations etc. required
