a living thing ". That is, we might stretch the use of 'robot'
(or 'machine') to cover this different case, and thereby, by
implication, introduce a new criterion for " having a sensation ".
For a thing " to have a sensation " it must now not only exhibit
the appropriate internial and external behaviour, but also be,
and hence in other situations behave like, a living thing. If we
say (a), then clearly robots give us no reason for retaining the
distinction between " behaviour " and " experience ". Likewise,
if we say (b). Suppose we are asked: " If the robot hasn't any
sensations at all, and yet behaves in respect of a red shape just
as X does, what is the difference between them ? Surely you
have to say that Mr. X has a certain experience in addition to
merely behaving ? " Then the answer is: "No, we are not
obliged to say this, since the criterion of 'having a sensation '
has altered ". To say " X has certain sensations when looking
at a red shape " is not now only to say: " X exhibits appropriate
internal and external behaviour in respect of it ". It is also to
say that X exhibits other behaviour characteristic of an organism.
And this is the difference to which we point to distinguish
between X and the robot. X's behaviour towards the red shape
is part of the stream of behaviour of a living thing; the robot's
is not. If we now construct a slide and start supposing the
robot to be more and more like a living thing (e.g., eating food, not
oil, showing affective disturbances, and so on), then at various
points on the slide different individuals will switch to saying (a)

EXPERIENCE


and so giving it " sensations ". General agreement to say (a)
would perhaps be obtained when we reach a machine that exhibited
the robot-like analogue of reproduction, development and death.
If we overlook semantic points of this sort, we are apt to be
confused and taken in by arguments like the one of Broad's so
often quoted.' " However completely the behaviour.- of an
external body answers to the behaviouristic tests for intelligence,
