it always remains a perfectly sensible question to ask: Has it
really got a mind, or is it merely an automaton ? . . . Since
the question can be raised, and is evidently not tautologous or
self-contradictory, it is clear that when we ascribe a mind or a
mental process to an external body, we do not mean simply that
it behaves in certain characteristic ways.'' This argument is
persuasive because (i) Broad is using " external body " (and, by
implication, also " robot " and " machine ") in the ordinary
sense which entails that it has no mind; and (ii) he makes us
concentrate unwittingly on the overt behaviour of the external
body or robot. But if a robot were produced whose covert
behaviour was also like ours, then the question: " Has it a
mind " will cease to'be sensible for those of us who take line
(a) above and say: " This thing is a new sort of organism ".
For to say that something is a sort of organism entails saying
that it exhibits certain mental functions of some order, low or
high. On the other hand, for those who take line (b) above, and
say the thing is just a new sort of robot, the question: " Has it
a mind " remains sensible but Broad's argument becomes
irrelevant. For to these people the criterion of " having a
sensation " or " mind " is not merely that the thing should
satisfy certain behaviouristic tests, but that it should also be,
and hence behave like, an organism. Consequently, the question:
" Has it a mind ? " remains sensible, and has a negative answer.
But now this argument is of no use to Broad. All it establishes
is that by " mind " we do not mean " external bodies behaving
in certain characteristic ways ". It does not help him to establish that by " mind " we do not mean " organisms behaving in
certain characteristic ways ". But it is this question in which
Behaviouristic psychologists are interested; it is to them that
1See The Mind and it8 Place in Nature, Ch. XIV.
2 Confusing talk on this topic, however, is not the monopoly of the
philosophers. Boring and Hull have both argued that psychological
subjects should be regarded as robots, and Boring has suggested substituting "robotology " for "psychology ". See Boring, Amer. J. of
Psych., op. cit.; and Hull, Principle8 of Behaviour, Ch. I.

B.
