
So far I have pointed to some of 'the causes of the philosophical difficulty we are in about " behaviour " and " experience ". There are many others. Here are a few of the many.
1. "If, when I see a red shape, I am supposed to be behaving
only and not experiencing anything, what is this stimulus to

which I am reacting ? If you say it is the physical enerigy or
the light waves, then I don't react to these at all-I may know
nothing about them. If, on the other hand, you say it is the
red shape, then this red shape is not a physical stimulus, but
a ' seen ' or ' experienced ' something. So I am not just
behaving. I am experiencing something."
2. There are all the sentences where we use predicates of
sensations, e.g., " The sensation was intense ", " It was a painful
sensation ". These sentences are used for all the sensory
modalities 'and for all the respects in which " sensations " vary
in quality, intensity, extensity, and duration. These sentences
lead us to want to say that there are such things as mental
states, processes and events with properties, and so lead us to
resist noting how the experience we want to talk about has no
properties at all.
3. There are all the sentences where we use " feeling " and
" emotion " words and expressions in ways comparable to the
ways we use "' sensation " words and expressions.
4. There is the array of sentences where we use " conscious
of ', " aware of " and their variants.
5. There are the sentences where we say, e.g., " I was ashamed
of myself ", or " I was acutely self-conscious at the time ", or
"That child is still charmingly unself-conscious".
All these sentences in 2 to 5 can be used to frame an indefinite
number of specific objections of various sorts to the diagnosis
offered-as I have done in 1. I shall not consider any more

objections here. What I have said, therefore, is inevitably
something of a hit or miss aflair. If the sources which I have
discussed are also the chief sources for any given individual,
then what I have said may help him to become aware of, and
