psychologists. (i) If all that goes on, when X looks at a red
shape, is that X is just discriminating, is in a state of behavioural
readiness, etc., then he is not experiencing anything at all.
But (ii) if he does experience something, then it is false to say
that this experience is identical with his behaviour, etc. The
first alternative is compelling because if all that happens is that
Mr. X behaves, etc., then by our ordinary use of " behaviour "
and " experience ", it is true to say: " X is not experiencing
anything ". But this alternative is silly, because if we were to
discover an X who was producing all the usual behaviour,
internal and external, we would hesitate and want to say: " X
is also experiencing something ". The objection to this (" But
to say this is to go beyond our evidence ") can only be supported
by now using " experience " in the unusual raw feel way. Alternative (ii) moves us because we normally use " experience " and
" behaviour " as contrasts. But this alternative is also silly
because we can only give it the force we want it to have by unwittingly restricting the use of the word " experience " to " raw
feels ". Only by doing this can we go on defending the view
that "experience " and " behaviour " are not identical; and
this line of defence is hopeless. It is futile to try to rescue ourselves by admitting that " When, e.g., I see something, all that
is happening is that I am reacting, etc."; and it is equally futile
for anyone to retort : "But this is absurd (or false) ". These
moves are futile for reasons similar to those that make the
parallel moves futile for the physiologist.
It should be apparent by now that "experience " is a nonobservable something to a physiologist or psychologist; and that,
unlike concepts such as " homeostasis " or " the unconscious ",
he has no need to use or postulate it. Contemporary science, in
short, does not seem to require the notion of " experience ", and
is getting to the brink-of rejecting it, in effect, as " unreal " or
1 For Dr. Ewing again, see MIND, Jan., 1949.

EXPERIENCE


"non-existent ". If the
this direction, and if W
than
