Adrian-like talk, as S. Smith Steven does, and speak of the
sense organs as " windows " that " start the messages along the
nerves, the highways to the brain ", which " bare messages
themselves . . . we call sensations ".1 Do not use the double

terminology indiscriminately-" responses " and " sensations ",

" sensitivity " and " experience ", and so on-under the pretence
that psychologists can safely ignore the question, or in the hope
of impressing readers with your open-mindedness. Indiscriminate talk will just confuse, and open-mindedness just be exposed
for the muddle that it is.
Some positive recommendations. Talk about neural events
(or processes) and behaviour or conduct, or responses of an
organism or person. Of, if you like, talk of physiological and
psychological events (or processes). In this case the distinction
is one of present convention and convenience only-between
those events that are dealt with by people called neurologists or
physiologists and those dealt with by psychologists. Get rid of
the nuisance words like " sensation ", "experience ", and so on,
by defining them provisionally by means of concepts like:
stimulus patterns, a discrimination by an organism, a readiness
to discriminate, a discrimination of a discrimination. If we must
talk ' causally ', talk of one causal nex-us that assists in providing
" the basis " of the capacities and dispositions of the organism.
When a neural impulse reaches the cortex, certain other neural
events are produced, and these in turn contribute to produce the
organism's total response that is its " seeing " or " recognising "
or " having a pain ". Talk about the gap in our knowledge as
lying between the neural discharge in the cortex and the organ1 This ghastly quotation comes from Boring, Langfeld and Weld, op.
cit. To those who know the work of Professor Stevens (of Harvard) and
who appreciate his sensitivity to questions of method, it is all the more
astonishing and unfortunate that this remark should be in a chapter that
he prepared.



