ism's total response-for this is an empirical gap. Say that when
we can fill this gap, we will be able to give the physiological basis

of the capacity of the organism, e.g., to recognise- something, and
of the correlate of his recognition of it on any occasion. Say
that when we can do this, we may be able to offer generally
acceptable definitions of psychological concepts in physiological
terms. Say that when we possess a definitive psychology and
physiology, the relation between the two sciences is likely to be
this: psychology will use " conduct " or " behaviour " notions
and no "experience" ones; and these will be definable in
physiological terms, so that psychology will be a sub-theory
inside physiology.1 Instead of including " experience " and
" behavioui " within the subject matter of psychology, regard
the subject matter as including " behaviour " only. But add
the proviso that this view will cease to have any point as it
becomes generally accepted and successfully eliminates the notion
that contrasts at present with " behaviour ".

Final remarks.

The conclusion, therefore, for Adrian and Tolman and Co. is
that their worry that they have left out, or are in danger of
leaving out, something is needless. Their fears are groundless
that their sciences cannot in principle provide accounts that are
complete. They can get rid of mental events and experience.
But they get rid of them in a queer way-by realising it is just
foolish to suppose that there are, or are not, any such things.
When they have given us a definitive psychology and physiology,
what they will have done is not an impossible and absurd correlation between physiological and mental events. What they will
have done is to have given the physiological correlates of behaviour. This is quite a feasible thing to attempt; and there
is nothing else to do.
This conclusion has a bearing on various philosophical
questions. It makes obvious the foolishness of the traditional questions and answers about the relation between
mind and matter, and mind and body. So the variants of
Materialism, Epiphenomenalism, Interactionism and so forth are
